European Accounting Review, Vol. 14, No. 1, 41 - 61, 2005  The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance  LARS HASSEL , HENRIK NILSSON   AND SIV NYQUIST   A  bo Akademi University,   Umea  School of Business and Economics and  Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences  (Received February 2002; accepted August 2004)  information. Our  ABSTRACT This paper provides insight into how environmental information is re?ected in the market value of listed Swedish companies. Using the residual income valuation model, we express market value of equity as a function of book value of equity, accounting earnings, and environmental performance, where the last variable is used as a proxy for other value-relevant research is motivated by the recommendation of the Swedish Society of Financial Analysts regarding environmental reporting. This recommendation assumes that environmental information has value relevance, since it is likely to affect the expected future earnings of listed companies. We contribute empirical ?ndings to current debate on the relationship between environmental performance and shareholder value. The cost-concerned school argues that environmental investments represent only increased costs, resulting in decreased earnings and lower market values. The value creation school regards environmental efforts as a way to increase competitive advantage and improve ?nancial returns to the investors. The current research ?nds support for the cost-concerned school, because the results indicate that environmental performance has a negative in?uence on the market value of ?rms.  1.  Introduction  The purpose of this study is to investigate the value relevance of environmental performance ratings for the market values of ?rms listed on Stockholm stock exchange (Stockholmsbo rsen). The study proposes that the market value of  Correspondence Address: Henrik Nilsson, Umea  School of Business and Economics, Umea  University, SE-901 87 Umea , Sweden. E-mail: henrik.nilsson@fek.umu.se  0963-8180 Print=1468-4497 Online=05=010041 - 21 # 2005 European Accounting Association DOI: 10.1080/0963818042000279722 Published by Routledge Journals, Taylor & Francis Group Ltd on behalf of the EAA.   42 L. Hassel et al.  ?rms will re?ect both their ?nancial and environmental performance. According to our research model, ?nancial performance does not alone explain market values of ?rms, but the value relevance of ?nancial statement information can be increased if it is combined with environmental information that has been com- piled into performance ratings. In this respect, the study is related to research on value relevance of non-?nancial information in other contexts. Such extensions of purely ?nancial models include the Amir and Lev (1996) study of the wireless communications industry, the Deng et al. (1999) study of high-tech ?rms, and the studies by Trueman et al. (2000) and Rajgopal et al. (2003) of the valuation of internet stocks. There is also a stream of value relevance studies of intangible assets, such as brand assets, that are not disclosed in ?nancial statements (Kalla- pur and Kwan, 2004).  Accounting research on the ?nancial outcomes of environmental efforts con- sists of two main streams. The ?nancial bene?ts of environmentally friendly practices are searched for in pollution level studies. Event studies are used to demonstrate ?nancial gains or returns from 'greening'. Proponents of 'it pays to be green' say that there is a causal link between environmental and ?nancial performance. Pollution reduction is said to produce future cost savings and mini- mize future environmental liabilities (Porter and van der Linde, 1995; Reinhardt, 1999). An early pollution control related study was the Belkaoui (1976) study of the relationship between market reaction and disclosed pollution control expen- ditures. Spicer (1978) found that expenditures for pollution control were associ- ated with ?nancial performance among pulp and paper ?rms. Freedman and Jaggi (1986) searched for the relationship between market value and pollution disclos- ures, and Cormier et al. (1993) and Bath (1999) for the relationship between ?nancial variables, market values, and pollution levels. Hart and Ahuja (1996) investigated the relationship between emission reductions and both return on assets and return on sales. They showed that changes in pollution predate changes in ?nancial performance. King and Lennox (2001) had dif?culties inter- preting the Hart and Ahuja study because of dif?culties linking environmental performance improvements to future ?nancial gain. Attempts to isolate the effects of pollution control on future net cash ?ows and to account for ?rm differ- ences beyond environmental efforts have proven to be a challenge for accounting research.  Environmental event type studies attempt to demonstrate that 'greening' results in ?nancial gains. Such studies look at changes in stock prices or market values following some environmental event. Hart (1997) has proposed that excess ?nancial returns result from the relative environmental capabilities of ?rms. When isolating an environmental event within a narrow window, important ?rm differences can be controlled for; the events under study, however, are only partially environmental and their dynamics are unknown. Shane and Spicer (1983) investigated the relationship between security price movements and disclosed studies of social performance. Research inspired by environmental regulations includes Maloney and McCormick (1982),   The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance  43  environmental  standards. Klassen and McLaughlin (1996)  Blacconiere and Patten (1994), and Dowell et al. (2000), the latter of which examined the relationship between market values and adoption of stringent global and Feldman et al. (1997) studied the effects of published events on ?rm value, and found that both positive and negative events were related to ?rm value. Freedman and Jaggi (1986) could not, however, relate ?rm value to environ- mental management. Milne and Chane (1999) conducted an experimental study of the relationship between narrative social disclosures and investment decisions. They found that only a small minority of respondents altered their investment decisions because of social disclosures. Based on prior litera- ture, Cormier and Magnan (1997) suggested a study on the relationship between environmental stewardship and ?rm value. Subsequent research has produced mixed ?ndings, and has not explicitly focused on the value rele- vance of environmental performance in complementing traditional accounting numbers. This paper contributes to ?lling that gap, by considering how the stock market re?ects environmental performance over and above traditional ?nancial statement information.  This paper uses an accounting-based valuation model developed by Ohlson (1995), in which the market value of equity is considered as a function of book value, accounting earnings, and environmental performance. The environmental performance variable is used as a proxy for other value-relevant information in the model. Ilinitch et al. (1998) have presented both a theo- retical and empirical approach to an enhanced measurement of environmental performance. In this paper we use a special performance index, or an envi- ronmental rating of companies, developed for institutional investors in the Swedish stock market. Because the performance rating is disclosed for ?nan- cial market purposes, the index is a priori expected to be a potential driver of future earnings of a company with value relevance on the Stockholm stock exchange.  Our results indicate that environmental performance ratings complement accounting information, and consequently, that environmental performance has value relevance in the Swedish stock market. Speci?cally, we ?nd a signi?cant negative relationship between the market value of listed Swedish companies and their environmental performance ratings as measured by an environmental performance index. The results also indicate that the negative relationship is more pronounced in the latter portion of the study period, after environmental accounting regulations was changed. The results also apply universally across all industry groups.  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the value relevance of environmental performance in the Swedish context. The following section presents the theoretical model that has been used and related regression equations developed to link ?nancial and environmental performance to the market value of ?rms. The data, sample, and results are presented before the conclusions of the paper.   44 L. Hassel et al.  2. The Relevance of Environmental Performance  There is a general belief that various stakeholders require information from com- panies regarding their environmental performance. According to Deegan and Rankin (1997), annual report users have been found to believe that environmental information is important for their decision making and that they seek such infor- mation in annual reports. However, Deegan and Rankin (1997) also claim that the quality of environmental performance disclosures by companies themselves is low and biased. This section will brie?y highlight the developments of environmental disclosures in Sweden and the need for and foundations of the environmental performance rating that is used in the empirical section of the study.  The importance to the investor of information on a company's environmental concerns and performance has recently been highlighted by the Swedish Society of Financial Analysts (SFF). Their recommendation, Environmental Information for Financial Analysts, states: 'For an increasing number of ?rms a positive environmental pro?le has become an important element in their marketing strat- egy, and a lack of such a pro?le constitutes a risk factor' (SFF, 2000, p. 58; author's translation). More importantly for this study, they suggest that: 'environ- mental factors will increasingly in?uence the future cash ?ows of ?rms in both a positive and negative way. Equity valuation, credit analysis, and other economic decisions that involve ?nancial analyses are based on forecasts of future earnings or cash ?ows. These forecasts are in?uenced by or complemented with sensitivity analysis and risk estimation. The opinion of the Society is that such estimation will be increasingly determined by environmental factors' (SFF, 2000, p. 58; author's translation).  Swedish companies voluntarily disclose environmental information. However, from January, 1999, environmental information is also required by the account- ing legislation. Companies that have a license to operate, according to the Environmental Code, must disclose information in their administrative reports as to how their operations directly in?uence the external environment (SFS, 1995: 1554). The increased focus on environmental reporting is not unique to Sweden. Bebbington (1999) says that Danish companies are mandated to publish environmental information as 'green accounts'. In June 2001, the European Commission adopted a recommendation on the recognition, mea- surement, and disclosure of environmental issues in annual accounts and annual reports. This recommendation applies to all companies covered by the EU fourth and seventh Company Law Directives (78/660/EEC and 83/349/ EEC), and was to be applied to all accounting periods starting within 12 months of the date of adoption. The recommendation aims to improve the quality, transparency, and comparability of the environmental information that companies present in their annual reports (European Commission, 2001).  An evaluation of the environmental performance must, however, go beyond liabilities (Ilinitch mere ?nancial statement disclosures of environmental et al., 1998). Gauging environmental performance requires the measurement of   The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance  45  non-?nancial dimensions of performance. Systematic attempts have been made to describe good environmental performance, and Epstein (1996) has outlined the components of corporate environmental scorecards. Lober (1996) suggested that organizations consider four dimensions of environmental effectiveness. He suggests an output-based approach to how well ?rms meet stated goals, a system resource-based approach to how ?rms capture resources in order to be competitive, an internal process-based approach to information ?ows and employee communication, and, ?nally, a strategic constituency-based approach to how well stakeholders' needs are met. Ilinitch et al. (1998) have integrated the process, outcome, internal, and external components of environmental per- formance criteria into a framework useful to various stakeholder groups, such as investors. This theoretical framework provides the foundation of the environ- mental performance ratings used in this study, as it meets the need for a practice- and organizational effectiveness-oriented measurement.  This paper makes use of accounting-based valuation theory developed by Ohlson (1995) to model the relationship between market value and environ- mental performance. Following recent studies in market-based accounting research (e.g. Trueman et al., 2000; Ali and Hwang, 2000), we de?ne value rel- evance as the ability of accounting or non-accounting measures to capture or summarize information that affects equity value. The model expresses the market value of equity as a function of a ?rm's book value, earnings, and other value-relevant non-?nancial information. An index attempting to mirror the environmental performance of Swedish listed ?rms was provided for this study by the Swedish ?rm, CaringCompany (CC) Research, AB. We use the index as a proxy for environmental performance.  Current debate on how environmental performance impacts the market value of ?rms is basically divided into two schools (The Assabet Group, 2000). The cost-concerned school argues that environmental investments and high environmental performance represent only increased costs, resulting in decreased earnings and lower market values. Consequently, the relationship between environmental performance and market value of a ?rm is expected to be negative (e.g. Jaggi and Freedman 1992; Walley and Whitehead, 1994). The value creation school regards environmental efforts as a way to increase com- petitive advantage and improve ?nancial returns to the investors. The relationship between environmental performance and market value is expected to be positive according to this view (e.g. Konar and Cohen 2000; Dowell et al., 2000).  The dif?culty of linking environmental reporting to ?nancial outcomes has been brought up by Bebbington (1999). Danish companies have since 1996 been mandated to publish environmental information in the form of a 'green account'. Bebbington (1999) reviews an governmental report on environmental reporting outcomes of legislation in Denmark, and concludes that it appears to have had no signi?cant adverse effects. One ?nding of the review was that about 50% of the ?rms complying with the environmental reporting legislation reported having achieved ?nancial bene?ts exceeding the costs involved. The   46 L. Hassel et al.  estimated costs of the environmental reports were dif?cult to measure, but he concluded that the distribution of costs and bene?ts was probably uneven. Case studies conducted by Repetto and Duncan (1999) revealed that companies operating in the pulp and paper industry face different levels of exposure to and associated ?nancial risks from environmental issues. In some cases, environ- mental issues had little impact on ?nancial performance and could be a source of increased value. In other cases, environmental issues could involve costs exceeding 10% of their current stock market values and materially affect their competitive positions. Also, King and Lenox (2001) found evidence of an associ- ation between pollution reduction and ?nancial performance, but were unable to prove the direction of causality (p. 113). Even though ?rms in cleaner industries had a higher Tobin's q, the confounding effects of ?xed ?rm attributes could not be ruled out. Based on the accounting standard adopted in 1990 in Canada, Li and McConomy (1999) have suggested that the disclosure of provisions for future removal and site restoration costs is relevant for ?rm value, as it may enable capital markets to proxy for the liabilities involved. The evidence was, however, inconclusive and the environmental proxy was more limited than that used in this study.  The research evidence mentioned above suggests that environmental efforts could lead to different ?nancial outcomes, as future earnings could be in?uenced both positively and negatively. Environmental information disclosed as per- formance ratings for the investor community is in this study expected to be value relevant and to complement ?nancial information in the valuation process. Value relevance is determined by analyzing how environmental per- formance is re?ected in the current expectations of future earnings that determine market values. If a relationship can be established, the ?nding would be consist- ent with investors' employing environmental performance information when setting prices, and the metric used to gauge environmental performance would be regarded as capturing the environmental information used by market partici- pants in valuing ?rms.  3. The Valuation and Regression Models  Linking Environmental Performance to the Market Value of the Firm  The valuation model developed by Ohlson (1995)1 is based on three main assumptions. First, the value of equity equals the present value of all future divi- dends. Second, the accounting system satis?es a clean surplus relationship. Finally, abnormal earnings evolve as a modi?ed ?rst-order, auto-regressive process and other information, nt, as a simple ?rst-order, auto-regressive process. Based on these assumptions, Ohlson (1995) derives the following valua- tion model:  MVt   BVt   a1AEt   a2vt,  (1)   The Value Relevance of Environmental Performance  47  where MVt is market value of equity at time t, BVt equals book value of equity at the end of the year t, AEt is equal to abnormal earnings (de?ned as the difference between net income and opening book value of equity multiplied by the req- uired rate of return) for period t, and vt is other non-accounting value-relevant information. Some of this non-accounting information consists of information regarding companies' environmental performance. In the sequel our concern is limited to information regarding companies' environmental performance. The model emphasizes the use of both accounting and non-accounting information in the valuation process. Furthermore, the valuation framework allows the environmental performance, EP, of the ?rm to be explicitly added in a regression model through the vt term. Hence, we model environmental performance as a proxy for other information in the framework.  Estimating (1) requires an estimate of the required rate of return in order to cal- culate abnormal earnings. Because of data constraints, no generally accepted method for estimating the required rate of return applies here. Therefore, follow- ing Collins et al. (1999) and Lin and Walker (2000), we instead restate (1) in terms of cum-dividend market value, opening book value, earnings, and other information (see Appendix for a derivation), and present the following empirical analogue of the Ohlson model:2  MVt   DIt   b0   b1BVt
