J Bus Ethics (2016) 138:295 310 DOI 10.1007/s10551-015-2587-3  Good Neighbors but Bad Employers: Two Faces of Corporate Social Responsibility Programs  Heung-Jun Jung   Dong-One Kim  Received: 25 September 2013 / Accepted: 23 February 2015 / Published online: 6 March 2015   The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com  Abstract Using two ?rm-level datasets in Korea, we analyzed the effects of corporate social responsibility (CSR) on employment relations. We propose that par- ticipation in corporate social activity may not necessarily re?ect an ethical commitment to do  the right thing,  but instead can be associated with mobilizing internal re- sources to offset the costs imposed by external CSR in- volvement undertaken because of social pressure. Analysis of the two datasets showed similar results. The results demonstrate that socially responsible actions facilitate employer tendency to use performance-based pay and ef- ?ciency-based work practices. We also ?nd that CSR has a negative association with employment growth and in- creased labor ?exibility through contingent employment. These ?ndings shed light on the internal impact of CSR involvement on a ?rm s employment policies with respect to resource allocation. Keywords Corporate social responsibility   Employment relations   Resource allocation   Ef?ciency-based works   Performance-based pay   Labor costs  Introduction  As ?rms encounter intensive pressure from consumers, community groups, and NGOs while simultaneously facing heightened competition in the global economy, they are  H.-J. Jung   D.-O. Kim (&) Business School, Korea University, 5-1 Anam-dong, Sungbuk- gu, Seoul 136-701, Korea e-mail: dokim@korea.ac.kr; dokim64@hotmail.com  H.-J. Jung e-mail: hjun.jeong@gmail.com; yoon2@korea.ac.kr  increasingly compelled to acknowledge the demands of corporate social responsibility (CSR). Although CSR ac- tivities have greatly increased in recent years, conceptual and empirical research on CSR during the last four decades has mainly examined the relationship between CSR and ?nancial performance (Cochran and Wood 1984; McWil- liams and Siegel 2000; Pava and Krausz 1996; Waddock and Graves 1997). As a result, research on CSR has been criticized for ignoring the relationships between CSR and other factors (Campbell 2007; Margolis and Walsh 2003). One of these largely uninvestigated factors is the impact of CSR on employment relations. The lack of empirical research in this area, despite the importance of employees as stakeholders in business organizations, is in sharp con- trast to the recently escalating interest in the ethics of hu- man resource management (Inyang et al. 2011; Guest and Woodrow 2012).  Within the realm of the research that has been under- taken on this topic, two contrasting indications have emerged concerning the association between CSR and employees. From a social identi?cation perspective, a few recent empirical studies have suggested that organizational CSR improves employee job satisfaction (De Roeck et al. 2014), organizational commitment (Brammer et al. 2007), and human resource retention (Jones 2010). On the other hand, several qualitative studies have treated CSR as part of a corporate propaganda strategy that can easily ignore the interests of employees affected (Deakin and Hobbs 2007; Hillman and Keim 2001). Consequently, these em- pirical inconsistencies have raised the need for a better comprehension of the relationship between CSR and em- ployment relations. In line with this thinking, Jamali and Mirshak (2007) have suggested the need for quantitative research on the effects of CSR on employment relations at the ?rm-level. Nevertheless, empirical studies on the  123  296  H.-J. Jung, D.-O. Kim  impact of CSR on employment relations remain scarce (Rodrigo and Arenas 2008).  The current paper, intended to ?ll this research gap, proposes an alternative framework for examining the re- lationship between CSR and employment relations. From a resource allocation viewpoint, this study analyzed the ef- fect of CSR on various employment relations outcomes such as performance-based wages, ef?ciency-based work practices, employment growth, restructuring, and contin- gent employment. Proposed hypotheses were tested using two kinds of Korean ?rm-level datasets. This study ?rst describes the institutional context: CSR in Korea. Theo- retical perspective, hypotheses, analyses, and empirical results follow. Finally, there is a discussion of ?ndings, conclusions, and implications.  Institutional Context: CSR in South Korea  Over the past few decades, Korean ?rms have drastically revised their business strategy on CSR from traditionalism to globalization. Engaging in CSR activity to improve a ?rm s reputation is now a popular business strategy (Kim and Choi 2013). For instance, the total CSR expenditure of the top 220 Korean ?rms has increased from USD 1.9 billion in 2008 to USD 2.5 billion in 2010 (Federation of Korean Industries 2011). Moreover, the Federation of Korean Industries, an organization of employers, has re- ported that a majority of the largest 500 Korean companies have enacted a code of ethics (Federation of Korean In- dustries 2011).  Managerial awareness of CSR in Korea stems largely from changing business environments because of rapid globalization. This trend has facilitated the rapid spread of CSR in Korea. That is, Korean ?rms have become more globalized since the early 1990s. For instance, foreign di- rect investment by Korean multinational corporations (MNCs) increased from about USD 1068 million in 1990 to over USD 25,590 million in 2011 (Korea Eximbank 2012). This change has required Korean MNCs to adopt and ad- here to global standards in response to social demands in host countries. Thus, CSR undertaken by large Korean ?rms has involved efforts to improve ethical business practices such as management improved corporate governance, and integrity in accounting.  transparency,  Despite this increase in CSR activity, controversy exists as to whether CSR can improve the interests of both in- ternal and external stakeholders. Whereas corporate man- agers argue that CSR in Korea has bene?ted the well-being of employees, others believe that these policies have been instituted merely for public relations and largely ignore the interests of employees (Choi et al. 2010). For instance, in a study (2005)  companies, Welford  of  30 Korean  123  demonstrated that their CSR programs focused on external social issues rather than internal labor standards. We be- lieve that the recent dramatic growth in CSR activities and the debate on their impact on internal stakeholders render the Korean case a suitable research setting for the present study.  Theoretical Perspective and Hypotheses  Although academic debates over the last four decades have reached no clear consensus, CSR can be roughly de?ned as follows: Being closely related to the social expectations of corporations (Zenisek 1979), CSR involves multidimen- sional decision-making beyond the economic interests of the business (Carroll 1979, 1991) or legal requirements (McWilliams and Siegel 2001). Since scholars have de- ?ned CSR in different ways, some researchers have at- tached strategic implications to CSR without regard for its alleged altruism. For example, Porter and Kramer (2006) argued that corporate attention to CSR is not entirely vol- untary but involves strategic decision-making. According to their perspective, involvement in socially responsible activity within competitive business environments is not voluntary but a compelling strategic choice. This strategic view stems from societal expectations that perceive CSR involvement as a signal of corporate legitimacy. In the same vein, managers want CSR to be directly linked to performance (Zu and Song 2009), and CSR is certainly related to managerial concerns about the bottom line.  CSR and Employment Relations from a Resource Allocation Perspective  Resource is a paramount concern for managers attempting to implement CSR programs. One can easily see the im- portance of resource availability in pursuing CSR. Despite the importance of resource availability in implementing corporate responsibility programs, there is a dearth of scholarly attention in resource allocation decision in im- plementing speci?c social responsibility programs. The present paper tries to explain the effects of CSR programs on employment relations by exploring its integration with the conceptual framework of resource allocation decisions within ?rms.  The burden of obtaining resources for participating in CSR within a competitive business environment is always a concern for management. Indeed, Freeman (1984, pp. 38 40) con?rmed the relationship between CSR and available resources, as  CSR is often looked at as an  add on  to  business as usual  and the phrase often heard from executives is  CSR is ?ne, if you can afford it.  Since management has to consider both bene?ts and additional  Good Neighbors but Bad Employers  297  costs for CSR, the situation of  catch 22  in the adoption of CSR program frequently occurs (Jamali et al. 2009).  Needless to say, corporations need resources to respond to recent global trends, such as the adoption of codes of conduct and ISO26000. Some costs resulting from CSR activities are not directly ?nancial (such as environmental protection) but nonetheless frequently impose monetary burdens such as investment in green technologies; others are directly ?nancial, such as donations to charities and the creation of scholarship funds (Aupperle et al. 1985). As Campbell (2007) distinguished between lip service for CSR and substantive activities requiring signi?cant internal re- sources, socially responsible actions impose considerable costs. Parkinson (2003) also noted that CSR is often con- trolled by economic conditions rather than by managerial choices. Therefore, maintaining a good reputation through CSR in a competitive environment depends on a ?rm s resources to a certain degree.  A management committed to social issues is likely to work toward mobilizing available resources. Firms in- crease CSR involvement when they have adequate ?nan- cial resources (Ullmann 1985; Waddock and Graves 1997). If they do not have suf?cient resources for CSR initiative, however, management must mobilize other resources for maintaining CSR programs that satisfy social expectation. In particular, because involvement in social activity for external stakeholders results in higher social expenses than noninvolvement, ?rms pay attention to effective and ef?- cient use of resources. We used the logic of resource al- location in formulating the theoretical framework and hypotheses of our study.  Hypotheses  An important point here is that mobilizing resources in response to social responsibilities may sometimes con?ict with the interests of employees. Although employees are obviously one of the stakeholders and a few studies based on a normative perspective have given attention to the positive link between socially responsible actions and outcomes of employment relations, questions are arising as to the possibility of balancing the interests of all stake- holders, given the limited resources (Sternberg 1997).  During the process of resource mobilization, for exam- ple, ?rms can undertake cost cutting that may be detri- mental to working conditions. If CSR is adopted as part of a corporate propaganda strategy, the interests of employees are more like to be ignored or sacri?ced. Indeed, previous studies have indicated that although ?rms were involved in CSR activities, they often ignored their responsibilities to their employees (Aupperle et al. 1985; Pava and Krausz 1996). Hillman and Keim (2001) asserted that employers frequently regard CSR as an obligatory response to  external issues rather than as an obligation to their em- ployees. Deakin and Hobbs (2007) also argued that em- ployers tended to see CSR as concerned with external social issues and unrelated to internal employment issues. Similarly, IBM, the famous multinational company, has a long reputation for its involvement in CSR, but was forced to offer its employees early retirement, buyouts, and un- desirable transfers in order to maintain organizational ef- fectiveness (Cottrill 1990). Therefore, CSR itself may not bene?t employees.  Wood (1991) highlighted the importance of a balanced CSR activity based on three dimensions: individual choice (e.g., managerial preferences), organizational responsibility (e.g., ?rm-speci?c interests), and institutional necessity (e.g., general obligations). However, qualitative research has demonstrated that because of a lack of resources, bal- anced CSR activities in all three dimensions are rarely achievable and thus not adopted (Cooper and Owen 2007; Cottrill 1990; Hillman and Keim 2001; Vogel 2006). In many cases in which a choice must be made between ex- ternal and internal demands, a ?rm must consider external demands ?rst because of the inability, over concern for its reputation and public image, to withdraw from social ac- tivities. As a result, ?rms are increasingly directing their CSR activities into external social issues, especially when social demands are strong and the requisite internal re- source is not available.  A business primarily has two options to mobilize its resources. One is to improve its organizational ef?ciency. The other is to reduce its internal costs. From a strategic business perspective, the goal of mobilizing resources is to generate resource reserves through both ef?ciency en- hancement and cost minimization. Good examples of the former include efforts to increase productivity by using innovative work systems and/or undertaking practices to enhance employee motivation. These practices are closely associated with generating tangible and intangible re- sources by using employee knowledge and creativity through employee involvement programs and various in- centives to motivate employees. Cost minimization is as- sociated with reducing operating costs including labor costs. It can involve adoption of more ?exible utilization of human resources such as organizational restructuring and the use of a contingent labor force. In general, a contingent labor force is likely to be associated negatively with the interests of employees.  In formulating our hypotheses, we ?rst considered the methods that ?rms may adopt to improve organizational ef?ciency to mobilize resources for CSR. The majority of the literature mentioned that performance-based pay is one popular way for organizations to enhance organizational performance. Pay-for-performance is a monetary incentive pay system in which employee compensation is related to  123  298  H.-J. Jung, D.-O. Kim  job performance. Performance-based pay includes indi- vidual merit pay, gainsharing, and pro?t sharing. The number of companies adopting pay-for-performance in Korea has been steadily increasing since the late 1990s, and over 50 % of all Korean companies were reported to connect at least part of an employee s pay to measures of performance (Shin et al. 2014). Since monetary rewards are the main incentive for increased productivity, quality, and customer service, pay-for-performance is considered as a powerful motivator in enhancing organizational perfor- mance by motivating and reinforcing the rewarded behavior.  Firms needing resources for CSR programs such ?nan- cial donations have to improve short-term ?nancial per- formance by adopting performance-enhancing programs. We determine that corporations implementing CSR pro- grams are likely to adopt pay-for-performance because it motivates employees through material, i.e., monetary, in- centives. This is why that the ?nancial performance of ?rms with pay-for-performance is superior to that of ?rms without it and previous empirical studies support this claim (Abowd 1990; Delery and Doty 1996; Lee et al. 2011; Origo 2009). For example, Origo (2009), using data from Italian metalworking ?rms, found that performance-related pay contributed to increases in productivity in the range of 7 11 %.  More speci?cally, prior literature has reported a sig- ni?cant relationship between CSR and incentive-based compensation (Falck and Heblich 2007; Mahoney and Thorne 2005). Also, Jones et al. (2007), in their case study involving Australian companies, found that the extent to which a ?rm is involved in CSR was directly correlated to its adopting a performance-based wage system. Therefore, we are safe in assuming that ?rms oriented to CSR in- volvement are more likely to adopt performance-based pay than ?rms without CSR involvement. Based on this rea- soning and on previous empirical results, we formulated the following hypothesis:  Hypothesis 1 The degree of involvement in CSR will be positively related to the adoption of performance-based pay.  We also believe that ?rms with CSR activities are more likely to adopt ef?ciency-based work practices because these ?rms seek to recoup social costs through improved productivity and enhanced quality. Indeed, one way to re- coup the costs incurred through socially responsible actions is to increase internal ef?ciency through innovative work practices that improve organizational performance. Previ- ous studies have generally shown that ef?ciency-based work practices such as self-autonomous teams, quality circles and job rotations contributed positively to a ?rm s performance. These practices heightened employees  123  morale and satisfaction and increased motivation through involvements and better communication that in turn leads to heightened utilization of previously untapped knowledge and creativity within the workforce (Ichniowski et al. 1996; Neumark and Cappelli 1999). In a similar context, Paul and Siegel (2006) argued that managers tend to implement in- ternal ef?ciency practices along with CSR programs be- cause they expect the bene?ts of workplace innovation to exceed the costs associated with socially responsible ac- tivity. Vitaliano and Stella (2006), in their empirical study using data from the banking industry, also found that ?rms adopted practices aimed at maximizing internal ef?ciency to offset the costs of socially responsible activity. Based on the evidence from these studies, we hypothesized that ?rms engaged in CSR are more likely to adopt ef?ciency-based work practices than those without CSR.  Hypothesis 2 The degree of involvement in CSR will be positively related to the degree of adaptation of ef?ciency- based work practices.  Next, we also constructed hypotheses regarding how ?rms pursuing CSR activities attempt to use various means to minimize operating costs. CSR costs undertaken by a ?rm to solidify its public reputation and image seem to facilitate implementation of a labor cost minimization strategy. If ?rms cannot reduce such external obligations as CSR, they may instead implement a cost-cutting strategy to decrease internal costs such as labor. In this context, prior case studies have observed a tendency of management to separate re- sponsibility to employees from strategic CSR for social is- sues (Hillman and Keim 2001; Fenwick and Bierema 2008). That is, when a ?rm cannot maintain CSR activities for both internal and external stakeholders, management tends to pursue CSR activities exclusively for external stakeholders. The activities likely to be continued include environmental protection, donations, and scholarships.  In the same vein, the current study predicts a negative relationship between CSR activities and employment growth. Although new employee recruitment is important in terms of corporate social obligations to both employees and society, businesses participating in CSR may be wary of adding personnel because they must anticipate the ex- pense involved in CSR activities as well as plan for any unexpected future reduction in product demand. For man- agement, a larger employment roster implies a consider- able increase in short-term and long-term labor costs; these costs include recruitment, selection, training, compensa- tion, and safety and health. In many cases, management regards labor as a quasi-?xed cost. Indeed, several case studies have shown either that CSR and employment are unrelated (Deakin and Hobbs 2007), or that CSR is positively related to employee reduction in special situa- tions (Benson 2008). Overall, we believe that ?rms  Good Neighbors but Bad Employers  299  participating in CSR tend to have a more conservative employment policy than others and are less likely to ex- perience employment growth:  Hypothesis 3 The degree of involvement in CSR will be negatively related to employment growth.  According to Zu and Song (2009), managers perceive CSR as a ?nancial burden, and when they have to become involved in CSR activities, they ?rst examine their ?nan- cial situation. When a ?rm faces additional outlays for CSR to avoid violating its societal obligations, it is likely to concentrate on more pro?table practices that also improve organizational ef?ciency through reductions in labor costs. One way to reduce labor costs is to seek numerical ?ex- ibility, and organizational restructuring is one of the most widely used practices to achieve this. In general, restruc- turing has been regarded as a sure way to gain short-term ?nancial savings when facing ?nancial constraints. Thus, we opine that ?rms with CSR are more likely to restructure as a means to cope with CSR expenses.  The previous literature supports our proposition. For instance, Bonvin s (2007) case study in Switzerland de- scribed how a ?rm involved in CSR did not hesitate to lay off employees when it was short of liquid assets. Vogel (2006) also found that many global companies made social contributions in developing countries at the expense of their employees  job security in the parent country. These studies suggest that ?rms meeting external demands for social activities may have to resort to organizational re- structuring to minimize labor costs. This view highlights a positive association between CSR and organizational re- structuring in externally socially responsible ?rms. Pursuit of this line of reasoning leads to the following hypothesis:  Hypothesis 4 The degree of involvement in CSR will be positively related to organizational restructuring.  Another means of securing labor ?exibility is the usage of contingent workers. Although contingent employment ar- rangements have been criticized for the insecurity and vul- nerability for employees, use of nonstandard forms of employment may convey explicit advantages to contempo- rary corporations. This is because contingent employment provides ?rms with labor ?exibility while typically lowering labor costs. This labor arrangement confers ?exibility because contingent workers can be more easily terminated than per- manent employees, enabling rapid adjustment in labor to re- spond to changes in business conditions. Labor costs are typically lower in this arrangement because workers are paid less. We expect that CSR participation relates positively to the use of contingent employment. It is believed that ?rms un- dertaking social commitments such as making contributions and providing community services prefer workforce ?ex- ibility in which contingent employment is seen as an  instrument to offset social costs. Indeed, previous case studies have presented the possibility that conditions of resource constraints juxtapose CSR involvement and contingent em- ployment. Smith and Helfgott (2010) reported a case in which top management in a ?rm promised CSR policies focusing on community relations and environmental protection but con- comitantly reclassi?ed 70 % of its workforce from permanent to temporary contracts. In particular, CSR involvement may accelerate the usage of contingent employment in certain geographic regions (such as in Asia and Latin America) where legal protection of contingent employees is limited. In such countries, the cost of social expenses can easily be transferred to labor in the form of contingent employment. For these reasons, we formulated the following hypothesis:  Hypothesis 5 The degree of involvement in CSR will be positively related to the use of contingent employment.  Taken together, we proposed the following theoretical framework for the impact of CSR on employment relations (see Fig. 1).  Research Methods  In the present paper, we utilized two different datasets to construct a comprehensive picture on the effects of CSR on employment relations. While Study 1 included only listed ?rms that were relatively large and have well-developed CSR programs, Study 2 included a representative sample of all ?rms with more than 30 employees in Korea. By analyzing two different datasets, the results can be ex- pected to be less biased and have greater generalizability. If different datasets provide consistent results, the resultant ?ndings can expect greater credibility.  Study 1  Sampling  The analysis in this study was performed at the ?rm level. The sample was drawn from the CSR Index of the Korea  To mobilize  resources for   CSR  To mobilize resources for CSR  - Implement performance-based pay (H1)  - Implement efficiency-based work practices (H2)  To reduce costs  - Control employment growth (H3)  - Implement restructuring (H4)   - Increase contingent employment (H5)   Fig. 1 A theoretical framework for CSR  123  300  H.-J. Jung, D.-O. Kim  Economic Justice Institute (KEJI). Established in 1990, KEJI is one of the leading nongovernmental organizations in Korea. KEJI has evaluated the CSR activities of publicly listed ?rms annually since 1991, and each company is rated on multiple attributes deemed relevant to CSR. The KEJI index covers about 350 publicly listed Korean companies and annually discloses the scores of Korea s top 200 ?rms in terms of CSR. The KEJI index excludes banks, mutual fund companies, and real estate investment ?rms because these ?rms have very different ?nancial and accounting systems and business environments from other ?rms such as those in manufacturing, transportation, and construction. Data for 5 years (2005 2009) on the ?rms comprising the KEJI Index made up the dataset analyzed in this study. This study examined 251 ?rms that were listed in the top 200 at least twice during the 5-year period. After excluding 17 ?rms that had gone out of business or merged during the study period, 234 ?rms remained in our ?nal sample.  CSR evaluation using the KEJI index has a special ad- vantage. This dataset has CSR performance ratings since 1991 and thus a depth of data useful for longitudinal ana- lysis to investigate CSR trends. Indeed, the KEJI index was the ?rst comprehensive, multidimensional CSR rating de- veloped in Korea. It is comparable to the index of the Council on Economic Priorities in the U.S., the Corporate Responsibility Index in Australia, and the Asahi Founda- tion Index of Japan (Choi et al. 2010). The KEJI index is also similar to the index of Kinder, Lydenberg, and Domini (KLD), which has rated the ?rms of the S&P 500 (?rms) index on seven CSR categories since 1991.  Measurement  The present study collected data from four sources: the KEJI index, telephone survey, business reports of ?rms, and archival data from the Ministry of Labor and Em- ployment in Korea. First, the KEJI index evaluates seven qualitative areas (i.e., corporate governance, corporate justice, economic contribution, community relations, cus- tomer satisfaction, employee relations, and environmental protection) based on 38 CSR items. The KEJI index is based on publicly available data of the stock market and other sources such as business reports. The KEJI index used a modi?ed version of items taken from studies by Graves and Waddock (1994).  CSR activity was measured through the eight items of the KEJI index listed below. These items can be classi?ed into three categories: community service, environmental protection, and customer satisfaction related to social is- sues. These eight items are as follows: amount of charitable donations (this item belongs to community relations); en- ergy ef?ciency in the workplace, environmental violations, public disclosure of environmental violations, and rewards  123  related to environmental protection (these four items be- long to environmental protection); and, lastly, certi?cates of service, certi?cates of quality, and reductions in the growth of advertising (these three items belong to customer satisfaction). Each of the eight items was rated with stan- dardized values calculated from the original scores.1 Two categories of values, 0 2 and 0 3, were used for these eight items. The scale from 0 to 2 was used for energy ef?ciency, public disclosures about environmental violations, certi?- cates of service, and reductions in the growth of advertis- ing. The scale from 0 to 3 was applied to amount of charitable donations, rewards related to environmental protection, environmental violations, and certi?cates of quality. Therefore, the total possible score of CSR as the sum of the above eight items ranged from 0 to 20.  Second, we conducted a telephone survey to collect data for dependent variables such as performance-based pay, ef?ciency-based work practices, and contingent employ- ment. Human resources managers in the 234 ?rms were surveyed in this way. We collected data for the past 5 years (2005 2009) because ?rms usually had HR records for this period. The telephone survey was conducted between April 1, 2011, and October 1, 2011. Completed questionnaires were collected from 166 ?rms (response rate: 70.94 %) after several follow-ups. The 166 ?rms included 88 unionized and 78 nonunion organizations. The perfor- mance-based pay variable was measured by the existence of an individual merit pay system, gainsharing, or pro?t sharing program, as used in the study by Brown (1990). If a ?rm had an individual merit pay system, it was coded as 1 (otherwise 0). If a ?rm had a gainsharing or pro?t sharing program, it was coded as 1 (otherwise 0). The perfor- mance-based pay variable was calculated by the sum of the two variables above, ranging from 0 to 2. Ef?ciency-based work practices were obtained from HR managers and were measured by three items used by Osterman (1994). The three items are: team, QC activity, and job rotation. Re- sponses were rated from 0 (nonexistent) to 1 (existent). All three items were summed, and the variable, ef?ciency- based work practices, was rated on a scale of 0 3. The contingent employment variable was calculated as a per- centage of the sum of part-time and ?xed-term employees  1 All items of the KEJI index were standardized by the following process: First, a standardized value was created by two methods. One is linear interpolation, which is a method of curve ?tting using linear polynomials fy  ymin  ymax 
