Accounting  Organizations  and  Society ,  Vol .  17 ,  No  6 ,  pp  595 - -612 ,  1992  0361 -3682 /92   $5  00 +  O0  Printed  in  Great  Brttain  Pergamon  Press  Ltd  DETERMINANTS  OF  CORPORATE  SOCIAL  RESPONSIBILITY  DISCLOSURE :  AN  APPLICATION  OF  STAKEHOLDER  THEORY  ROBIN  W .  ROBERTS  School  of  Accountancy ,  University  of  Missouri -Columbia  Abstract  A  lack  of  sufficient  theoreucal  support  for  models  destgned  to  explain  corporate  soctal  responsibihty  actisaty  led  Ullmann   (Academy  of  Management  Rewew ,  1985 ,  pp .  540 -577 )  to  develop  a  framework  for  prechcting  corporate  social  activity  based  on  a  stakeholder  theory  of  strategic  management  This  study  empirically  tests  the  ability  of  stakeholder  theory  to  explain  one  s -Ix ~ific  corporate  social  responsibility  activtty   - -  social  responsibility  disclosure .  Results  support  this  application ,  finding  that  measures  of  stakeholder  power ,  strategm  posture ,  and  economic  performance  are  significantly  related  to  levels  of  corporate  socml  disclosure  UUmann   (1985 )  critically  evaluated  prior  research  in  the  area  of  corporate  social  respon -  sibility  and  concluded  that  several  deficiencies  exist  in  the  current  body  of  corporate  social  responsibility  research .  Foremost  in  his  critique  was  the  lack  of  a  comprehensive  social  respon -  sibility  theory  sufficient  to  explain  why  corpora -  tions  engage  in  social  responsibility  endeavors .  He  argues  that  this  lack  of  a  comprehensive  theory  is  responsible  for  the  conflicting  results  of  many  studies .  A  conceptual  framework  was  developed  by  Ullmann   (1985 )  as  sufficient  to  explain  the  relationships  among  social  dis -  closure ,  and  social  and  economic  performance .  This  framework  is  based  upon  the  stakeholder  approach  to  strategic  management  that  was  forwarded  by  Freeman   (1983 )  and  others ,  in  which  conflicting  external  demands  on  the  firm  may  be  addressed .  Some  recent  studies  in  the  social  responsibility  area  have  recognized  the  role  of  stakeholders  in  influencing  corporate  decisions   (e .g .  McGuire  et  al . ,  1988 ) ,  but  have  not  attempted  to  explicitly  test  stakeholder  influences  as  determinants  of  the  level  of  corporate  social  responsibility  activity .  The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  operationalize  the  stakeholder  framework  presented  by  Ullmann  and  empirically  test  the  effect  of  overall  firm  strategy  on  one  type  of  social  responsibility  activity   - -  social  responsibility  disclosure .  The  present  study  improves  on  prior  research  by  predicting  the  level  of  corporate  social  dis -  closure  within  a  comprehensive  theoretical  framework  and  by  adopting  independent ,  third -  party  evaluations  as  measures  of  the  level  of  corporate  social  disclosure .  The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows .  The  next  two  sections  discuss  prior  research  in  the  area  of  corporate  social  respon -  sibility  and  stakeholder  theory .  Thereafter ,  consideration  is  given  to  Ullmann 's  framework  for  analyzing  social  responsibility  disclosures .  The  social  responsibility  disclosure  model  de -  signed  to  test  Ullmarm 's  framework  is  then  explained  and  the  sample  is  described .  The  results  of  the  empirical  tests  and  the  conclu -  sions  and  limitations  of  the  study  are  presented  in  the  final  sections  of  the  paper .  PRIOR  RESEARCH  ON  CORPORATE  SOCIAL  RESPONSIBILITY  Prior  research  has  defined  corporate  social  responsibility  activities  as  policies  or  actions  which  identify  a  company  as  being  concerned  with  society -related  issues .  Studies  have  exam -  ined  corporate  social  responsibility  activities  in  595   596  R  w  ROBERTS  many  areas  itfcluding  the  following  categories :   (1 )  the  environment ,   (2 )  affirmative  action  programs ,   (3 )  equal  employment  opportunity  policies ,   (4 )  community  involvement ,   (5 )  pro -  duct  safety ,   (6 )  policies  toward  South  Africa ,   (7 )  energy  policies ,  and   (8 )  social  responsibility  disclosure   (CEP ,  1986 ;  Cowen  et  al . ,  1987 ) .  Studies  of  relationships  among  social  disclosure ,  social  performance ,  and  economic  performance  of  corporations  include  philosophical  treatises  on  businesses '  inherent  responsibilities  to  society ,  research  regarding  the  economic  con -  sequences  or  information  content  of  social  responsibility  activities  and  studies  of  the  determinants  of  social  responsibility  disclosures .   ~  Each  stream  of  research  is  reviewed  below .  The  social  responsibilities  of  business  During  the  1960s  and  1970s  the  relationship  between  business  and  society  was  re -examined  and  with  that  re -examination  emerged  new  theories  regarding  corporate  responsibilities  to  society   (Dierkes   &  Antal ,  1986 ) .  Steiner   (1972 ) ,  Davis   (1973 )  and  others  proposed  that  diffusion  of  corporate  ownership  made  the  traditional  manager -owner  model  of  the  business  entity  misspecified .  They  argued  that  although  busi -  ness  is ,  fundamentally ,  an  economic  institution ,  larger  firms  exert  significant  influence  in  society  and  have  responsibilities  to  use  some  economic  resources  in  an  altruistic  manner  to  aid  in  meeting  social  goals  Keim   (1978b )  argued  that  social  responsibility  activities  may  be  consistent  with  wealth  max -  imization  motives  of  the  firm .  He  stated  that  as  society  changes  societal  constraints  on  business  activity  also  change .  In  a  social  environment  that  expects  all  corporations  to  exhibit  concern  for  social  goals ,  corporations  that  do  not  may  be  punished .  Similar  conclusions  were  reached  by  Belkaoui   (1976 )  and  Watts   &  Zimmerman   (1978 ) .  Stakeholder  theory  provides  an  avenue  in  which  to  integrate  the  hypotheses  regarding  corporate  social  responsibility  activities  forwarded  by  Keim ,  Belkaoui ,  and  Watts  and  Zimmerman  into  a  model  of  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosure .  Economic  consequences  and  information  content  studies  Studies  on  the  effects  of  corporate  social  responsibility  activities  on  firm  value  have  produced  mixed  results .  Some  studies  have  reported  beneficial  effects  while  others  have  concluded  that  the  effects  are  negative  or  inconsequential .  Belkaoui   (1976 )  investigated  the  information  content  of  pollution  control  disclosures  by  developing  portfolios  of  disclos -  ing  and  nondisclosing  firms .  His  results  supported  an  ethical  investor  hypothesis  that  rewarded  companies  for  acting  in  a  socially  responsible  manner .  The  findings  of  some  additional  studies  produced  results  consistent  with  the  notion  that  corporate  social  responsibility  activities  impact  on  the  financial  markets   (Spicer ,  1978a ,  b ;  Anderson   &  Frankle ,  1980 ;  Shane   &  Spicer ,  1983 ) .  Some  studies  replicated  earlier  research  and  found  conflicting  results .  Frankle   &  Anderson   (1978 )  rejected  Belkaoui 's  interpretation  and  argued  that  nondisclosing  firms  had  consistently  performed  better  than  the  market .  In  a  similar  manner ,  Chen   &  Metcalf   (1980 )disagreed  with  Spicer 's  conclusions  arguing  that  the  results  were  driven  by  spurious  correlations .  In  re -  sponse ,  Spicer   (1980 )  stated  that  Chen  and  Metcalf  misinterpreted  the  purpose  of  his  study  emphasizing  that  associations ,  not  causal  rela -  tionships ,  were  being  investigated .  Ingrain   (1978 )  concluded  that  the  informa -  tion  content  of  social  responsibility  disclosures  was  conditional  upon  the  market  segment  with  which  a  firm  is  identified ,  while  Alexander   &  Buchholz   (1978 )  and  Abbott   &  Monsen   (1979 )  found  no  significant  relationship  between  a  corporation 's  level  of  social  responsibility  acti -  vities  and  stock  market  performance .  Chugh  et  al .   (1978 ) ,  Trotman   &  Bradley   (1981 )  and  In  addition  to  developing  a  stakeholder  framework  for  analyzing  corporate  soctal  responstbfltty  acnvities ,  Ullmann   (1985 )  provides  a  detailed  discussion  of  prior  research  m  the  area   SOCIAL  RESPONSIBILITY  DISCLOSURE  597  Mahapatra   (1984 )  concluded  that  corporate  social  responsibility  activities  may  lead  to  increased  systematic  risk .  These  studies  were  conducted  prior  to  Ullmann   (1985 )  and  are  subject  to  his  criticism  that  empirical  research  in  corporate  social  responsibility  has  not  developed  a  solid  theo -  retical  foundatiorL  While  some  studies  extended  earlier  work  through  methodological  improve -  ments  or  by  sampling  from  a  different  popula -  tion  of  companies ,  theoretical  advances  were  not  substantial .  Determinants  of  social  responsibility  activities  Cochran   &  Wood   (1984 )  used  corporate  social  responsibility  rankings  developed  by  Moskowitz   (1972 )  to  test  the  relationship  between  corporate  social  responsibility  activi -  ties  and  firm  performance .  After  controlling  for  industry  classification  and  corporate  age ,  a  weak ,  positive  association  between  social  re -  sponsibility  activities  and  financial  performance  was  found .  Mills   &  Gardner   (1984 )  concluded  in  their  analysis  of  the  relationship  between  social  disclosure  and  financial  performance  that  companies  are  more  likely  to  disclose  social  responsibility  expenditures  when  their  finan -  cial  statements  indicate  favorable  financial  performance .  Cowen  et  al .   (1987 )  examined  the  relation -  ships  between  several  corporate  characteristics  and  specific  categories  of  social  responsibility  disclosures .  Company  size ,  industry  classifica -  tion ,  profitability ,  and  the  presence  of  a  corporate  social  responsibility  committee  were  hypothes -  ized  as  potential  influences  on  corporate  social  disclosure .  The  results  of  a  multiple  regression  analysis  concluded ,  in  general ,  that  company  size  and  industry  classification  are  associated  with  corporate  social  disclosures .  McGuire  et  al .   (1988 )  used  Fortune  magazine 's  ratings  of  corporate  reputations  to  analyze  the  relation -  ships  between  perceived  corporate  social  respon -  sibility  performance  and  financial  performance .  Prior  financial  performance  of  the  firms ,  as  measured  by  both  stock  market  returns  and  accounting -based  measures ,  were  found  to  be  more  closely  related  to  corlx )rate  social  re -  sponsibility  than  was  subsequent  financial  per -  formance .  McGuire  et  al .   (1988 )  suggested  that  financial  performance  may  be  a  variable  in -  fluencing  social  responsibility  activities .  Conclusions  drawn  from  this  stream  of  empirical  research  were  generally  consis -  tent  with  the  theoretical  model  developed  by  Ullmann   (1985 ) ,  but  none  of  the  studies  provided  a  comprehensive  theory  to  predict  corporate  social  performance  or  disclosure .  McGuire  et  al .   (1988 )  reference  stakeholder  considerations  but  do  not  incorporate  measures  of  stakeholder  power  or  strategic  posture  into  their  empirical  tests .  STAKEHOLDER  THEORY  The  stakeholder  concept  Freeman   (1984 )  defines  a  stakeholder  as   "any  group  or  individual  who  can  affect  or  is  affected  by  the  achievement  of  the  firm 's  objectives " .  Stakeholders  of  the  firm  include  stockholders ,  creditors ,  employees ,  customers ,  suppliers ,  public  interest  groups ,  and  governmental  bodies .  Ansoff   (1965 )  was  the  first  to  use  the  term   "stakeholder  theory "  in  defining  the  objectives  of  the  firm .  A  major  objective  of  the  firm  was  to  attain  the  ability  to  balance  the  conflicting  demands  of  various  stakeholders  in  the  firm .  Freeman   (1983 )  categorized  the  develop -  ment  of  the  stakeholder  concept  into  a  cor -  porate  planning  and  business  policy  model  and  a  corporate  social  responsibility  model  of  stakeholder  management .  The  corporate  plan -  ning  and  business  policy  model  of  the  stake -  holder  concept  focuses  on  developing  and  evaluating  the  approval  of  corporate  strategic  decisions  by  groups  whose  support  is  required  for  the  corporation  to  continue  to  exist .  The  behavior  of  various  stakeholder  groups  is  considered  a  constraint  on  the  strategy  that  is  developed  by  management  to  best  match  corporate  resources  with  its  environment .  In  this  model  stakeholders  are  identified  as  cus -  tomers ,  owners ,  suppliers  and  public  groups  and  are  not  adversarial  in  nature .   598  R .  W  ROBERTS  The  corporate  social  responsibility  model  of  stakeholder  analysis  extends  the  corporate  planning  model  to  include  external  influences  on  the  firm  that  may  assume  adversarial  posi -  tions .  The  adversarial  groups  are  characterized  as  regulatory  or  special  interest  groups  con -  cerned  with  social  issues .  The  corporate  social  responsibility  model  allows  a  strategic  planning  model  to  adapt  to  changes  in  the  social  demands  of  nontraditional  power  groups .  Freeman   (1983 )  discusses  the  dynamics  of  stakeholder  influences  on  corporate  decisions .  A  major  role  of  corporate  management  is  to  assess  the  importance  of  meeting  stakeholder  demands  in  order  to  achieve  the  strategic  objectives  of  the  firm .  As  the  level  of  stake -  holder  power  increases  the  importance  of  meeting  stakeholder  demands  increases ,  also .  From  Freeman 's  model ,  Ullmann   (1985 )  de -  veloped  a  conceptual  model  of  corporate  social  responsibility  activities .  Thus ,  Ullmann  pro -  vides  a  conceptual  basis  for  studying  corporate  social  responsibility  activities  in  a  stakeholder  framework .  Ullmann  concluded  that  stake -  holder  theory  provides  an  appropriate  justifica -  tion  for  incorporating  strategic  decision  making  into  studies  of  corporate  social  respon -  sibility  activities .  The  Ullmann  model  is  dis -  cussed  in  detail  in  the  next  major  section  of  the  paper .  Applications  of  stakeholder  theory  Stakeholder  theory  has  been  applied  to  analytical  and  empirical  analyses  of  the  firm  and  the  environment  in  which  the  firm  operates .  The  proposition  that  stakeholder  interests  may  conflict  was  tested  by  Sturdivant   (1979 ) .  He  used  a  survey  to  compare  the  social  responsibility  attitudes  of  activist  group  leaders  and  corporate  managers .  As  hypothesized ,  there  were  signifi -  cant  differences  between  attitude  scores  of  activists  and  corporate  managers .  The  scores  indicated  that  activists  were  stronger  in  their  beliefs  that  businesses  should  be  responsive  to  social  issues .  Sturdivant  concluded  that  cor -  porate  management  should  not  necessarily  change  their  beliefs  to  conform  to  those  of  stakeholders ,  but  managers  should  consider  conflicting  stakeholder  interests  when  planning  corporate  strategy .  In  a  study  of  strategic  performance ,  Chakra -  varthy   (1986 )  discussed  the  inadequacy  of  traditional  profitability  measures  as  indicators  of  strategic  performance  and  proposed  the  use  of  a  stakeholder  satisfaction  measure .  He  argued  that  well -adapted  firms   (i .e .  firms  whose  strategic  performance  is  considered  excellent )  realize  that  co -operation  of  a  firm 's  multiple  stake -  holder  groups  is  a   "necessary  condition  for  excellence " .  A  Fortune  magazine  survey  of  corporate  reputations  in  which  stakeholder  satis -  faction  was  considered  was  cited  by  Chakravarthy  as  supporting  his  contention .  Cornell   &  Shapiro   (1987 )  discuss  the  role  of  stakeholders  other  than  investors  and  managers  in  the  development  of  a  firm 's  financial  policy .  They  contend  that  a  firm  issues   "implicit  claims "  to  non -investor  stakeholders  that  must  be  considered  when  developing  a  firm  strategy  regarding  capital  structure .  Implicit  claims ,  such  as  uninterrupted  service  to  customers ,  cannot  be  separated  from  a  firm 's  business  dealings  and  impact  a  firm 's  total  risk   (i .e .  expected  cash  flows ) .  Barton  et  al .   (1989 )  empirically  tested  Cornell  and  Shapiro 's  asser -  tion  that  stakeholder  theory  may  be  used  to  explain  cross -sectional  variations  in  firms '  capital  structures .  Using  a  diversification  strategy  vari -  able  to  proxy  for  a  stakeholder  construct ,  they  found  empirical  results  consistent  with  stake -  holder  predictions .  Their  research ,  along  with  the  other  studies  reviewed ,  provides  evidence  that  stakeholder  theory  is  a  viable  approach  to  predicting  and  explaining  management  behavior .  ULLMANN 'S  FRAMEWORK  Ullmann   (1985 )  concluded  that  corporate  social  responsibility  models  developed  in  prior  research  are  misspecified  because  the  relation -  ship  of  firm  strategy  to  the  social  responsibility  decision  has  not  been  incorporated  into  the  empirical  tests .  He  developed  a  contingency  framework  for  predicting  levels  of  corporate  social  responsibility  activity  and  disclosure   SOCIAL  RESPONSIBILITY  DISCLOSURE  599  based  on  the  stakeholder  concept  formalized  by  Freeman   (1984 ) .  Ullmann 's  framework  is  con -  sistent  with  the  conceptual  view  of  corporate  social  reporting  discussed  by  Dierkes   &  Antal   (1985 ) ,  that  publicly  disclosed  information  regarding  corporate  social  responsibility  activi -  ties  provides  a  basis  for  dialogue  with  various  business  constituencies .  Ullmann   (1985 )  presents  a  three -dimensional  model  as  sufficient  to  explain  almost  all  correla -  tions  among  social  disclosure  and  social  and  economic  performance .  Stakeholder  power  is  discussed  as  the  first  dimension  of  the  model ,  explaining  that  a  firm  will  be  responsive  to  the  intensity  of  stakeholder  demands .  A  stakeholder 's   (e .g .  owners ,  creditors ,  or  regulators )  power  to  influence  corporate  management  is  viewed  as  a  function  of  the  stakeholder 's  degree  of  control  over  resources  required  by  the  corporation   (Ullmann ,  1985 ) .  The  more  critical  stakeholder  resources  are  to  the  continued  viability  and  success  of  the  corporation ,  the  greater  the  expectation  that  stakeholder  demands  will  be  addressed .  If  social  responsibility  activities  are  viewed  as  an  effective  management  strategy  for  dealing  with  stakeholders ,  a  positive  relation -  ship  between  stakeholder  power  and  social  performance  and  social  disclosure  is  expected .  As  will  be  discussed  below  evidence  suggests  that  social  responsibility  activities  are  useful  in  developing  and  maintaining  satisfactory  rela -  tionships  with  stockholders ,  creditors ,  and  political  bodies .  Developing  a  corporate  reputa -  tion  as  being  socially  responsible ,  through  performing  and  disclosing  social  responsibility  activities ,  is  part  of  a  strategic  plan  for  managing  stakeholder  relationships .  The  second  dimension  of  the  model  is  the  firm 's  strategic  posture  toward  corporate  social  responsibility  activities .  Strategic  posture  de -  scribes  the  mode  of  response  of  a  company 's  key  decision  makers  concerning  social  demands .  UUmann  dichotomizes  strategic  posture  as  active  or  passive .  A  company  whose  manage -  ment  tries  to  influence  their  organization 's  status  with  key  stakeholders  through  social  responsibility  activities  possesses  an  active  posture .  If  a  company 's  management  is  not  continuously  monitoring  its  position  with  stake -  holders  and  is  not  developing  specific  programs  to  address  stakeholder  influences ,  then  the  company  is  perceived  to  possess  a  passive  strategic  posture .  Thus ,  the  more  active  the  strategic  posture  the  greater  the  expected  social  responsibility  activities  and  disclosures .  The  model 's  third  dimension  concerns  the  company 's  past  and  current  economic  perfor -  mance .  The  importance  placed  on  meeting  social  responsibility  goals  may  be  secondary  to  meeting  the  economic  demands  that  impact  directly  on  a  company 's  continued  viability .  Economic  performance  directly  affects  the  financial  capability  to  institute  social  responsi -  bility  programs .  Therefore ,  given  certain  levels  of  stakeholder  power  and  strategic  posture ,  the  better  the  economic  performance  of  a  company ,  the  greater  its  social  responsibility  activity  and  disclosures .  THE  SOCIAL  DISCLOSURE  MODEL  The  empirical  tests  in  this  study  use  measures  of  stakeholder  power ,  strategic  posture  toward  social  responsibility ,  and  economic  performance  to  predict  cross -sectional  variations  in  one  corporate  social  responsibility  activity  J  cor -  porate  social  responsibility  disclosure .  It  is  also  hypothesized  that  in  constructing  the  model ,  a  time  lag  between  measures  of  the  explanatory  factors  and  social  disclosure  is  necessary .  This  lag  is  necessary  due  to :   (1 )  the  dynamic  nature  of  strategic  planning ,   (2 )  the  focus  of  stakeholder  theory  on  meeting  the  long -term  interests  of  stakeholders ,   (3 )  the  empirical  findings  of  Cowen  et  al .   (1987 )  and  McGuire  et  al .   (1988 ) ,  and   (4 )  the  fact  that  social  disclosures  relate  primarily  to  past  social  responsibility  activities .  The  empirical  form  of  the  model  is :  SOCDISI ,t   =  b0   +  bl   +  b2   (PSHI ,  t -1 )   +  b  3   (lnPACt ,t _l )   +  b4   (DERATIO  t ,t -1 )   +  b5   (PUBAFF ~ ,t -I )   +  b6   (FOUNDs ,t _ , )   +  b7   (MGRROE ~ ,t _ ~ )   +  ba   (BETA ~ .t - ~ )   +  b9   (AGEt ,  t -1 )   +  blo   (INDEFFt .t -I )   +  bit   (lnSIZEt ,  t -I )   +  el ,   600  R  W  ROBERTS  where :  bo ,  bl  SOCDIS   =  intercept  terms ;   =  level  of  corporate  social  respon -  sibility  disclosure  for  firm  i  in  period  t ;  0   - -  poor ,  1   =  good ,  2   =  excellent ;  PSH   =  percentage  of  ownership  in  firm  i  held  by  management  and  share -  holders  holding  more  than  5 %  of  common  stock  at  period  t   -  1 ;  PAC   =  dollars  contributed  by  firm  i  to  its  corporate  political  action  com -  mittee  in  period  t   -  1 ;  DERATIO   =  average  debt  to  equity  ratio  for  firm  i  in  period  t   -  1 ;  PUBAFF   =  average  number  of  corporate  public  affairs  staff  members  employed  by  firm  i  in  period  t   -  1 ;  FOUND   =  sponsorship  of  a  philanthropic  foundation  by  firm  i  in  period  t   -  1 ;  FOUND   =  1  if  a  corporate  philanthropic  foundation  exists .  Otherwise ,  FOUND   =  0 ;  MGRROE   - - -  average  annual  change  in  return  on  equity  for  firm  i  in  period  t   -  I ;  BETA   - -  market  model  measure  of  syste -  matic  risk  for  firm  i  at  period  t   -  1 ;  AGE   =  age  of  corporation  at  period  t -  1 ;  INDEFF   - -  presence  of  firm  i  in  a  high  profile  industry  at  period  t   -  1 ;  INDEFF   =  1  if  a  corporation  is  part  of  a  high  profile  industry .  Otherwise ,  INDEFF   =  0 ;  SIZE   =  average  revenues  of  firm  i  in  period  t   -  1 .  In  the  empirical  tests ,  period  t  represents  the  years  1984 -1986 .  For  the  independent  vari -  ables  PSH ,  BETA ,  AGE ,  and  INDEFF ,  t   - -  1  represents  1984 .  For  PAC ,  DERATIO ,  MGRROE ,  and  SIZE ,  t   -  1  represents  the  years  1981 -  1984 .  The  period  t   -  1  represents  the  years  1983 -1984  for  the  variables  PUBAFF  and  FOUND .  2  Logarithmic  transformations  of  the  variables  PAC  and  SIZE  are  used  when  estimat -  ing  the  social  disclosure  model .  The  transfor -  mation  is  performed  because  variables  with  observations  that  are  large  in  absolute  amounts  can  overwhelm  other  variables  during  the  logistic  regression  iteration  process .  A  com -  plete  description  of  the  variables  used  in  the  model  is  presented  in  Table  1 .  Dependent  variable  The  dependent  variable  for  the  social  dis -  closure  model   (SOCDIS )  is  adapted  from  an  extensive  analysis  of  the  social  responsibility  activities  of  130  major  corporations  that  was  published  by  the  Council  on  Economic  Priori -  ties   (CEP )  in  1986 .  The  CEP  analysis  resulted  in  a  rating  of  each  corporation 's  level  of  disclosure  of  social  responsibility  activities  from  1984  to  1986 .  This  extensive  search  by  the  CEP  involved :   (  1   )  direct  communication  with  each  company ,   (2 )  a  review  of  corporate  annual  reports ,  10K  reports ,  and  proxy  statements ,   (3 )  an  in -depth  study  of  newspapers ,  magazines ,  and  other  publications ,  and   (4 )  an  analysis  of  secondary  information  sources  such  as  The  Taft  Corporate  Giving  Directory ,  the  National  Directory  of  Corporate  Charity ,  and  the  National  Data  Book .  The  CEP  evaluated  each  corporation 's  social  disclosure  performance  and  a  rating  of  a   =  excellent ,  c   =  good ,  or  f   - -  poor  was  deter -  mined .  If  a  corporation  included  in  the  sample  received  an   "a "  rating  from  the  CEP ,  the  dependent  variable  SOCDIS  is  set  equal  to  2 .  If  a  company  received  a  CEP  rating  of   "c " ,  SOCDIS  is  set  equal  to  1 ,  and  for  an   "f "  rating  SOCDIS  is  set  equal  to  0 .  Wiseman   (1982 )  found  significant  discrepan -  cies  between  some  corporate  social  disclosures  and  actual  corporate  social  responsibility  activi -  ties .  This  led  Ullmann   (1985 )  to  conclude  that  voluntary  corporate  disclosures  should  not  be  used  as  proxies  for  social  responsibility  per -  formance .  By  evaluating  many  alternative  sources  2  The  National  Directory  of  Corporate  Public  Affairs  is  the  source  for  data  relating  to  the  variables  PUBAFF  and  FOUND  This  directory  was  not  pubhshed  before  1983 .  Therefore ,  PUBAFF  and  FOUND  are  limtted  to  two  years  of  data   SOCIAL  RESPONSIBILITY  DISCLOSURE  TABLE  1 .  Description  of  variables  601  Variable  Data  name   (expected  sign )  Description  source  Dependent  variable  SOCDIS   (n  a . )  Independent  vartables  Stakeholder  power  PSH   ( - - )  PAC   ( + )  DERATIO   ( + )  Strategm  posture  PUBAFF   ( + )  FOUND   ( + )  Economic  performance  MGRROE   ( + )  BETA   ( - )  Control  variables  AGE   ( + )  IN 'DEFT   ( + )  SIZE   ( + / - )  Evaluatton  of  corporate  social  disclosures  1984 -1986  SOCDIS  Council  on   =  0  ff  disclosure  is  poor ,  1  if  good ,  2  if  excellent  Economic  Prioritms   %  of  corporatton  owned  by  management  and  by  individual  Proxy  statements  shareholders  owning  more  than  5 %  of  outstanding  shares  in  1984  Natural  log  of  the  dollars  contributed  by  corporate  PACs  to  Council  on  pohttcal  campaigns  1981 -1984  Economic  Priorittes  Average  debt  to  equity  ratio  1981 -1984  Compustat  Average  size  of  corporate  pubhc  affairs  staff  1983 -1984  FOUND   =  1  if  corporatton  sponsors  a  phdanthroptc  foundation  in  1983   &  1984 ,  else  FOUND   =  0  National  Directory  of  Corporate  Public  Affairs  National  Directory  of  Corporate  Public  Affairs  Average  annual  change  m  return  on  eqmty  1981 -1984  Beta  for  1984  computed  using  market  model  voth  60  month  esttmatton  period  Age  of  corporation  m  1984  INDEFF   =  1  if  corporation  ts  in  the  automobile ,  airline ,  or  oil  industry ,  else  INDEFF   =  0  Natural  log  of  average  revenues  1981 -1984  Compustat  Compustat  Compustat  council  on  Economic  Pnoritms  Compustat  to  corroborative  evidence  regarding  corporate  social  disclosure ,  the  CEP  ratings  provide  an  improved  measure  of  both  the  level  and  the  reliability  of  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosure .  Independent  variables  The  independent  variables  used  in  the  empir -  ical  tests  represent  the  level  of  stakeholder  power ,  the  strategic  posture  toward  social  responsibility  activities ,  or  the  economic  per -  formance  of  a  corporation .  The  proxies  selected  to  represent  these  hypothesized  influences  on  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosures  are  discussed  in  this  section .  Stakeholder  power  variables ,  Three  stake -  holder  power  variables  are  included  in  the  social  disclosure  model .  The  variable  PSH  represents  the  potential  stakeholder  power  of  passive  investors   (i .e .  stockholders ) .  The  vari -  able  PAC  provides  a  measure  of  governmental   (i .e .  political ,  legislative ,  or  regulatory )  risks  faced  by  corporations  and  DERATIO  proxies  for  potential  creditor  influences .  The  rationale  for  the  selection  of  these  proxies  and  their  relation -  ship  to  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosures  is  presented  below .  Stockholder  power  Keirn   (1978a )  stated  that  as  the  distribution  of  ownership  of  a  corporation  becomes  less  concentrated ,  the  demands  placed  on  the  corporation  by  share  owners  becomes  broader .  Disperse  corporate  ownership ,  espe -  cially  by  investors  concerned  with  corporate  social  activities   (e .g .  social  responsibility  mutual  funds ,  church  and  civic  pension  plans ,  and  ethical  investors ) ,  heightens  pressure  for   602  IZ  w .  ROBERTS  management  to  disclose  social  responsibility  activities   (Ullmann ,  1985 ) .  The  variable  PSH  represents  the  percentage  of  outstanding  com -  mon  stock  held  by  corporate  management  and  by  other  individuals  who  own  5 %  or  more  of  the  stock .  Following  from  Keim  and  Ullmann ,  it  is  hypothesized  that  the  wider  the  dispersion  of  corporate  ownership  the  better  the  corpora -  tion 's  social  responsibility  disclosures .  Thus ,  an  inverse  relationship  is  predicted  between  PSH  and  the  dependent  variable  SOCDIS .  Governmental  and  regulatory  influences .  Freeman   (1984 )  discussed  the  role  of  legisla -  tive  bodies  as  corporate  stakeholders .  Watts   &  Zimmerman   (1978 )  developed  a  political  costs  hypothesis  to  argue  that  corporations  employ  social  responsibility  activities  to  reduce  the  risk  of  governmental  intrusions ,  such  as  regulation ,  that  may  adversely  affect  firm  value .  The  political  costs  hypothesis  and  the  stakeholder  concept  both  recognize  the  ability  of  govern -  ment  to  have  an  impact  on  corporate  strategy  and  performance .  Thus ,  government  can  be  viewed  as  a  corporate  stakeholder  whose  interests  must  be  addressed  by  management .  Higher  levels  of  perceived  governmental  in -  fluence  on  corporate  activity  would  be  ex -  pected  to  lead  to  a  greater  effort  by  management  to  meet  expectations  of  government .  Social  responsibility  disclosures  may  be  used  by  management  as  a  strategy  designed  to  satisfy  government  demands .  Prior  accounting  research  has  relied  on  a  corporate  size  variable  to  proxy  for  the  impact  of  political  activity  on  corporate  strategy .  Size  has  been  criticized  as  a  proxy  for  political  exposure  because  it  is  correlated  with  many  other  corporate  characteristics .  This  study  uses  corporate  political  action  committee  contribu -  tions  from  1981 -1984  as  an  indicator  of  government  stakeholder  power .  Corporate  political  activity  has  been  described  as  a  set  of  managerial  decisions  designed  to  increase  the  firm 's  competitive  advantage  in  the  political  arena ,  and  political  action  committee  contribu -  tions  have  been  specifically  discussed  as  a  major  type  of  strategy   (Keim   &  Zeithaml ,  1986 ;  Keim   &  Baysinger ,  1988 ) .  Keim   &  Zardkoohi   (1988 )  concluded  that  political  action  committee  con -  tributions  may  serve  as  protection  against  future  political  risks  or  to  influence  enactment  of  favorable  legislation .  In  an  analysis  of  environ -  mental  regulation ,  Hahn   (1990 )  concluded  that  environmental  policy  decisions  result  from  a  struggle  between  key  interest  groups  and  specified  industry  influences  as  a  critical  com -  ponent  in  the  process .  Hahn 's  conclusions  provide  further  support  for  a  comprehensive  approach  to  analyzing  pollution  control  ex -  penditures  and  corporate  social  responsibility  activities .  These  studies  in  corporate  political  activity  and  environmental  regulation  infer  that  cor -  porate  political  action  committee  contributions  result  from  a  corporate  strategy  designed  to  manage  political  risks .  It  follows  that  relatively  larger  amounts  of  corporate  political  action  committee  contributions  result  from  manage -  ment  perceptions  of  higher  regulatory  and  political  pressure ,  and  that  social  responsibility  disclosures  will  more  likely  be  of  interest  to  regulatory  agencies  and  political  groups .  Thus ,  it  is  hypothesized  that  PAC  is  directly  related  to  the  dependent  variable  SOCDIS .  Creditor  influences .  Creditors  control  access  to  financial  resources  that  may  be  necessary  for  the  continued  operation  of  a  corporation .  Ullmann   (1985 )  posited  that  if  a  corporation  perceives  stakeholders  as  concerned  with  social  responsibility  activities  the  corporation  will  have  greater  incentives  to  disclose  its  activities .  Stakeholder  analysis  has  been  used  in  prior  research  to  explain  corporate  decisions  regard -  ing  financial  policies   (Cornell   &  Shapiro ,  1987 ;  Barton  et  al . ,  1989 ) .  The  analyses  concluded  that  capital  structure  decisions  are  part  of  an  overall  corporate  stakeholder  strategy  and  that  creditors  are  important  stakeholders  whose  influences  should  be  managed .  It  follows  that  the  greater  the  degree  to  which  a  corporation  relies  on  debt  financing  to  fund  capital  projects ,  the  greater  the  degree  to  which  corporate  management  would  be  expected  to  respond  to  creditor  expectations   SOCIAL  RESPONSIBILITY  DISCLOSURE  603  concerning  a  corporation 's  role  in  social  re -  sponsibility  activities .  To  test  the  hypothesis  that  the  level  of  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosure  is  directly  related  to  the  degree  to  which  a  corporation  is  leveraged ,  the  variable  DERATIO  is  included  in  the  social  disclosure  model .  DERATIO  is  defined  as  the  corporation 's  average  debt  to  equity  ratio  for  1981  to  1984 .  The  debt  to  equity  ratio  is  chosen  as  a  measure  of  creditor  stakeholder  power  because  it  cap -  tures  the  importance  of  creditors  as  stake -  holders  relative  to  equity  investors .  DERATIO  is  expected  to  have  a  direct  relationship  to  the  level  of  corporate  social  disclosure .  Strategic  posture  variables .  Hatten  et  al .   (1978 )  define  corporate  strategy  as  relating  to  the  goals  and  objectives  of  the  firm  regarding  the  products  it  offers ,  the  markets  it  will  serve ,  and  the  environment  in  which  it  will  operate .  Bowman   &  Haire   (1975 )  discussed  corporate  social  responsibility  from  a  strategic  posture  perspective .  Ullmann   (1985 )  discusses  the  role  of  strategy  in  defining  how  a  corporation  may  respond  to  social  demands .  An  active  strategic  posture  toward  social  demands  is  expected  to  result  in  greater  social  responsibility  activities .  3  Two  variables  included  in  the  social  disclosure  model  to  test  the  relationship  between  strategic  posture  toward  social  responsibility  disclosure  and  the  level  of  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosures  are  discussed  below .  Public  affairs  staff .  Corporate  public  affairs  departments  are  developed  to  initiate  and  monitor  corporate  policy  regarding  public  relations ,  community  affairs ,  governmental  affairs ,  and  issues  management   (Marcus   &  Kaufman ,  1988 ) .  Marx   (1990 )  and  Blair   (1986 )  emphas -  ized  the  importance  of  integrating  public  affairs  management  into  corporate  strategic  planning  decisions .  Due  to  corporate  public  affairs  departments '  success  in  helping  maintain  com -  petitive  advantages ,  the  public  affairs  function  has  been  legitimized  and  corporate  support  increased   (Marcus   &  Kaufman ,  1988 ) .  Public  affairs  activities  are  designed  to  build  long -term  rapport  and  goodwill  with  various  stakeholders ,  and  to  protect  or  enhance  revenues  by  control -  ling  business  and  political  risks .  Given  how  prior  studies  have  defined  the  mission  of  corporate  public  affairs  departments ,  it  follows  that  corporations  that  assume  an  active  strategic  posture  toward  social  respon -  sibility  activities  would  establish  and  support  a  public  affairs  staff .  The  hypothesis  that  corporations  with  relatively  larger  public  affairs  departments  will  have  higher  levels  of  social  responsibility  disclosure  is  tested  through  the  variable  PUBAFF .  PUBAFF  represents  the  aver -  age  size  of  the  corporation 's  public  affairs  staff  during  1983 -1984 .  Philanthropic  foundation .  Corporate  contri -  butions  to  charity  are  generally  considered  social  responsibility  activities   (Rosebush ,  1987 ) .  Navarro   (1988 )  developed  a  formal  structural  model  in  which  corporate  contributions  to  charity  are  also  consistent  with  a  profit  maxim -  ization  objective .  Profit  motives  consistent  with  charitable  giving  include :   (  1   )  promotion  of  the  firm 's  image  in  order  to  help  insulate  the  firm  from  unfavorable  tax  or  regulatory  policies ;   (2 )  educational  support  in  order  to  increase  the  long -run  labor  supply  of  skilled  employees ;   (3 )  an  increase  in  goodwill  support  by  cus -  tomers ;  and   (4 )  other  promotional  considera -  tions  that  may  reduce  operational  and  capital  costs   (Navarro ,  1988 ) .  The  motives  presented  above  describe  anticipated  responses  from  key  stakeholders  when  information  concerning  corporate  charitable  contributions  is  disclosed .  Rosebush   (1987 )  argued  that  charitable  contributions  are  more  effective  when  the  strategy  for  corporate  giving  is  organized  and  well  executed .  Corporate  sponsored  phil -  3  As  a  revtewer  pointed  out ,  an   "active "  strategic  posture  toward  social  responsibility  could  imply  an  overt  pohcy  of  minimizing  corporate  social  activities .  I  use  the  term   "acttve  strategic  posture "  to  define  a  corporate  strategy  m  whtch  the  corporation  portrays  a  positive  stance  toward  social  responsibility  actavities   604  R  W  ROBERTS  anthropic  foundations  are  established  for  this  specific  purpose .  Because  corporate  charitable  giving  can  be  considered  a  strategic  tool  for  managing  stakeholders  and  organized  giving  provides  an  effective  method  for  monitoring  this  activity ,  the  existence  of  a  corporate  sponsored  charitable  foundation  is  used  as  a  measure  of  corporate  strategic  posture  towards  social  responsibility  disclosure .  The  indepen -  dent  variable  FOUND  equals  one  if  the  firm  sponsors  a  foundation  during  1983 -1984  and  is  expected  to  be  directly  related  to  a  corpora -  tion 's  level  of  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosure .  Economic  performance  variables .  Belkaoui   (1976 ) ,  Ingram   (1978 ) ,  Mahapatra   (1984 ) ,  McGuire  et  aL   (1988 )  and  others  have  empiric -  ally  tested  the  relationship  between  corporate  social  disclosure  and  economic  performance .  While  some  of  the  tests  have  controlled  for  firm  size ,  industry  classification ,  or  systematic  risk ,  the  social  disclosure /economic  performance  association  has  not  been  investigated  empirically  in  a  comprehensive  social  disclosure  framework .  In  this  study ,  an  accounting -based  measure   (MGRROE )  and  a  stock -market -based  measure   (BETA )  of  economic  performance  are  employed  to  test  the  impact  of  prior  economic  performance  on  a  company 's  level  of  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosure .  Return  on  equity .  Sustained  growth  in  economic  returns  to  equity  investors  is  a  primary  goal  that  is  common  to  all  corporate  managers .  Trends  in  earnings -based  measures  of  economic  perform -  ance ,  such  as  return  on  equity ,  are  frequently  used  in  evaluating  the  performance  of  corporate  officers .  Given  that  in  periods  of  low  profitability  economic  demands  take  priority  over  discre -  tionary  social  responsibility  expenditures ,  satis -  factory  financial  performance  has  a  definite  influence  on  the  level  of  support  top  corporate  decision  makers  can  commit  to  future  social  responsibility  activities   (Ullmann ,  1985 ) .  Thus ,  stakeholder  theory  predicts  a  positive  associa -  tion  between  accounting -based  measures  of  prior  economic  performance  and  corporate  levels  of  social  responsibility  disclosure .  The  average  annual  percentage  change  in  a  firm 's  return  on  equity  from  1981  through  1984   (MGRROE )  is  included  in  the  social  disclosure  model  to  test  for  this  positive  relationship .  Systematic  risk .  Systematic  risk  is  defined  as  the  covariance  between  returns  on  a  risky  asset   (e . ~  a  corporation 's  common  stock )  and  market  portfolio ,  divided  by  the  variance  of  the  market  portfolio   (Copeland   &  Weston ,  1983 ) .  Corpo -  rations  that  have  low  measures  of  systematic  risk  are  expected  to  have  higher  levels  of  social  responsibility  activities  for  at  least  two  reasons .  First ,  corporations  exhibiting  low  systematic  risk  have  a  more  stable  pattern  of  stock  market  returns .  Given  that  economic  considerations  influence  corporate  decision  makers  regarding  social  responsibility  activities ,  stable  economic  performance  should  enhance  a  corporation 's  ability  to  commit  to  involvement  in  social  responsibility  endeavors .  Second ,  because  re -  search  suggests  that  social  responsibility  activi -  ties  may  improve  a  firm 's  access  to  capital  and  increase  employee  morale  and  productivity   (Moskowitz ,  1972 ;  McGuire  et  al . ,  1988 ) ,  market  participants  may  view  socially  respon -  sible  firms  as  better  managed  and ,  thus ,  less  risky .  Disclosures  of  social  responsibility  activi -  ties  would  then  provide  information  that  the  market  uses  in  establishing  firm  value .  For  the  reasons  stated  above ,  corporations  with  low  systematic  risk  are  expected  to  have  higher  levels  of  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosure .  A  measure  of  a  firm 's  systematic  risk   (BETA )  is  included  in  the  estimation  of  the  social  disclosure  model .  It  is  expected  that  BETA  is  inversely  related  to  SOCDIS .  Control  variables .  Results  of  prior  studies  have  found  significant  relationships  between  company  size ,  the  age  of  a  corporation ,  industry  classification ,  and  social  responsibility  activities .  While  no  theory  was  forwarded  to  explain  these  empirical  associations ,  prior  research  suggests  that  corporate  size ,  industry  classifica -  tion  and  corporate  age  are  likely  to  act  as  intervening  variables  and  should  be  controlled   SOCIAL  RESPONSIBILITY  DISCLOSURE  605  for  in  empirical  tests   (Cochran   &  Wood ,  1984 ;  Ullmann ,  1985 ;  Cowen  et  al . ,  1987 ) .  In  addi -  tion ,  arguments  can  be  made  that  corporate  age  and  industry  classification  represent  some  aspect  of  stakeholder  power ,  strategic  posture ,  and /or  economic  performance .  Age .  As  a  corporation  matures ,  its  reputation  and  history  of  involvement  in  social  responsibility  activities  can  become  entrenched .  4  Stakeholder  expectations  regarding  sponsorship  and  in -  volvement  could  make  any  drastic  change  in  corporate  strategy  very  costly .  Sponsorship  withdrawal  could  signal  to  stakeholders  that  the  corporation  expects  financial  or  managerial  disturbances .  The  age  of  each  corporation  in  1984  is  included  in  the  model  through  the  variable  AGE  and  is  expected  to  be  directly  related  to  SOCDIS .  5  Industry  classificatior ~  Industry  classifications  used  in  prior  research  may  have  captured  some  systematic  relation  between  broad  industry  characteristics ,  such  as  intensity  of  competi -  tion ,  consumer  visibility ,  or  regulatory  risk ,  and  social  responsibility  activities .  Studies  have  used  samples  from  the  metals ,  oil ,  chemical ,  electronic  computing ,  food  processing ,  airline ,  and  numerous  other  industries  in  analyses  of  corporate  social  disclosures  either  because  of  data  availability  or  because  of  a  perception  that  the  particular  industry  faced  unique  social  pressures .  In  this  study ,  as  in  prior  studies ,  the  approach  to  controlling  for  possible  industry  effects  is  rather  ad  hoc .  Of  the  seven  industries  included  in  the  sample  used  in  this  study ,  the  automobile ,  airline ,  and  oil  industries  have  the  most  intuitive  appeal  as  industries  with  con -  sumer  visibility ,  a  high  level  of  political  risk ,  and  concentrated ,  intense  competition .  Thus ,  if  a  sample  company  is  identified  with  one  of  these  high  profile  industries ,  the  variable  INDEFF  is  set  equal  to  one .  If  a  company  belongs  to  the  food ,  health  and  personal  products ,  hotel ,  or  appliance  and  household  products  industry ,  INDEFF  is  set  equal  to  zero .  Corporations  in  high  profile  industries  are  expected  to  have  higher  levels  of  social  responsibility  disclosures .  Company  size .  Company  size  has  been  suggested  in  several  studies  as  a  correlate  of  the  level  of  corporate  social  responsibility  activity .  These  studies  posited  that  corporate  size  would  be  related  to  social  responsibility  activities  be -  cause  larger  companies  are  more  likely  to  be  scrutinized  by  both  the  general  public  and  socially  sensitive  special  interest  groups .  In  addition ,  larger  companies   (1 )  may  have  more  shareholders  interested  in  corporate  social  activity ,  and   (2 )  are  more  likely  to  use  formal  communication  channels  to  relate  results  of  social  endeavors  to  interested  parties   (Cowen  et  al . ,  1987 ) .  Although  Ullmann   (1985 )  does  not  incorpo -  rate  company  size  into  his  stakeholder  frame -  work ,  variables  used  to  represent  stakeholder  power  or  strategic  posture  dimensions   (e .g .  size  of  public  affairs  staff ,  dollars  contributed  to  corporate  political  action  committees )  may  be  correlated  with  company  size .  To  control  for  possible  corporate  size  effects ,  the  variable  SIZE  is  included  in  the  logistic  regression .  SIZE  is  defined  as  the  corporation 's  average  revenues  during  1981 -1984 .  SAMPLE  SELECTION  AND  DESCRIPTION  Companies  used  to  estimate  the  social  dis -  closure  model  are  drawn  from  130  major  corporations  that  were  investigated  in  1984 ,  1985  and  1986  by  the  Council  on  Economic  4  Navarro   (1988 )  uses  Texaco 's  sponsorshtp  of  the  Metropolitan  Opera  broadcasts  and  AT   &  T 's  support  of  the  pubhc  affairs  program ,  the  MacNeil - -Lehrer  News  Hour ,  as  examples  of  well -known  corporate  sponsorshtp  5  A  precise  measure  for  the  age  of  a  corporation  ts  difficult  due  to  the  posstbthty  of  mergers ,  reorgamzations ,  and /or  signLtiCant  changes  in  business  activltmS .  The  Compustat  measure  supplies  a  conststent  applicataon  of  an  age  calculation  method   606  R  W .  ROBERTS  Priorities   (CEP ) .  The  CEP  studies  focus  on  large  Fortune  500  companies  because ,  in  general ,  these  companies  are  influential  in  establishing  corporate  trends  in  the  social  responsibility  area .  Seven  industry  categories  were  represented :   (1 )  the  automobile  industry ,   (2 )  the  food  industry ,   (3 )  the  health  and  personal  care  industry ,   (4 )  the  airline  industry ,   (5 )  the  oil  industry ,   (6 )  the  hotel  industry ,  and   (7 )  the  appliance  and  household  products  industry .  The  results  of  their  study  were  published  in  a  book  entitled  Rating  America 's  Corporate  Conscience   (1986 ) .  Previous  CEP  reports  have  been  used  extensively  in  social  responsibility  research   (Spicer ,  1978 ;  Chen   &  Metcalf ,  1980 ;  Shane   &  Spicer ,  1983 ) .  This  study  is  the  first  to  use  the  1986  CEP  report  in  evaluating  levels  of  corporate  social  disclosure .  As  discussed  pre -  viously ,  the  CEP  investigators  rated  the  level  of  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosures  for  each  company  included  in  their  study .  Data  for  the  dependent  variable  in  the  social  dis -  closure  model   (SOCDIS )  were  taken  from  the  1986  CEP  report .  In  addition  to  the  information  provided  by  the  CEP ,  financial  and  ownership  data  were  required  to  test  the  social  disclosure  model .  Financial  statement  information  was  taken  from  the  1981 ,  1982 ,  1983 ,  and  1984  COMPUSTAT  files  and  used  to  calculate  the  variables  DERATIO ,  MGRROE ,  AGE ,  and  SIZE .  The  monthly  stock  price  data  necessary  to  compute  a  measure  of  TABLE  2  Descriptive  statistics  for  independent  variables  by  level  of  social  responstbihty  disclosure  Part  A :  Continuous  variables  Companies  with  poor  Independent  Variable  soctal  disclosure  variables  name   (n   =  26 )  Mean  S .D  Companies  voth  good  Compantes  with  excellent  soctal  disclosure  social  disclosure   (n   =  14 )   (n   =  40 )  Mean  S .D  Mean  S .D .  Percentage  of  ownership  held  PSH  17  488  26 .943  11 .659  16 .403  9 .417  16 .588  by  management  and  principal  shareholders  m  1984  Contributions  to  corporate  PAC  57 ,652  85 ,292  89 ,221  65 ,854  83 ,982  88 ,149  politmal  action  committee  for  1981 -1984   ( $ )  Average  debt /equtty  ratio  for  DERATIO  1 .719  1  395  0 .941  1  767  1 .967  5  108  1981 -1984  Number  of  pubhc  affairs  staff  PUBAFF  8 .731  10  332  14  143  8 .465  14 .188  12 .642  members  m  1984  Average  growth  m  return  on  MGRROE   - -22 .519  131  352  7918  20 .920  27  835  111  032  equity  for  1981 - -1984   ( % )  Market  model  measure  of  BETA  0 .860  0  338  0 .715  0  299  0  693  0 .293  systematic  rtsk   (beta )  in  1984  Age  of  corporation  from  AGE  53 .346  25 .197  65 .785  28 .412  71  075  23  314  reception  to  1984   (years )  Average  revenues  1981 -1984  SIZE  5500  4  9482  6  13 ,271 .0  17 ,O75 .4  10 ,479 .4  19 ,665 .4   (million   $ )  Part  B :  Indicator  variables  Independent  Vataable  variables  name  Companies  voth  poor  Compames  with  good  Companies  with  excellent  social  disclosures  social  disclosures  social  disclosures   (n   =  26 )   (n   = -  14 )   (n   =  40 )  Number   ( % )  Number   ( % )  Number   ( % )  Corporate  sponsor  of  a  philanthropic  foundation  High  profile  industry  status  FOUND  8   (31 )  11   (79 )  29   (73 )  INDEFF  11   (42 )  8   (57 )  20   (50 )   SOCIAL  RESPONSIBIUTY  DISCLOSURE  TABLE  3  Pearson  correlation  coeflioents  607  SOCDIS  PSH  PAC  DERATIO  PUBAFF  FOUND  MGRROE  BETA  AGE  INDEFF  PSH *   -0  172t   (O  12 )  PAC  0  172   - -0  226   (0  12 )   (0o4 )  DERATIO  0037  0083  0086   (0 .73 )   (045 )   (0 .44 )  PUBAFF  02O6   -O269  0356   -0 .090   (006 )   (002 )   (0 .01 )   (043 )  FOUND  0361   -0031  0138   - -0220  0 .256   (001 )   (0 .78 )   (0 .22 )   (0o5 )   (002 )  MGRROE  0203  0097   -0312   -0 .105   -0036   (007 )   (0  38 )   (001 )   (035 )   (074 )  BETA   -0231  0390  0036  0286   -0058   (003 )   (0 .01 )   (074 )   (001 )   (061 )  AGE  O  303   -O  020   -0  029   -0  184  0  163   (001 )   (085 )   (079 )   (0 .10 )   (0  14 )  INDEFF  O  O61   -0 .003  0 .012   -0  108   -0  190   (0 .59 )   (097 )   (091 )   (0 .34 )   (009 )  SIZE  0 .120   -0 .274  0 .386   -0O89  0  727   (0 .29 )   (001 )   (001 )   (043 )   (0 .01 )  0  161   (0 .15 )   - -0  176   - -O .O64   (0  11 )   (0 .56 )  0  216  0  033   (005 )   (0 .76 )   - -O  173   - -0  041   (0  12 )   (072 )  0  156   - -0  101   (0  17 )   (0 .37 )   -0 .152   (0  17 )   -0 .144   (020 )   -0 .155   (0  17 )   -0  142   (0 .21 )  0  177   -0  104   (0 .12 )   (0  36 )   *  See  Table  1  for  a  complete  description  of  the  variables .  t  The  top  number  represents  the  degree  of  correlation  and  the  bottom  number  represents  the  level  of  slgmficance  each  firm 's  systematic  risk   (BETA )  was  taken  from  the  COMPUSTAT  files ,  also .  The  data  for  the  variable  PSH  were  gathered  from  each  company 's  1984  proxy  statements ,  and  the  1986  CEP  report  contained  the  information  necessary  for  the  variables  PAC  and  INDEFF  Information  for  PUBAFF  and  FOUND  came  from  the  National  Directory  of  Corporate  Public  Affairs   (Close   &  Colgate ,  1983 ,  1984 ) .  Of  the  130  corporations  profiled  by  the  CEP ,  80  met  the  data  require -  ments  of  the  study .  Twenty -six  of  the  companies  included  in  the  sample  were  rated  by  the  CEP  as  having  poor  social  disclosure .  Fourteen  of  the  companies  received  good  social  disclosure  ratings  and  40  companies  were  rated  as  excellent .  Table  2  presents  the  descriptive  statistics  for  the  independent  variables  for  each  category  of  social  disclosure .  Table  3  presents  the  bivariate  correlations  between  the  CEP  evaluation  of  corporate  social  disclosure  and  measures  of  stakeholder  power ,  strategic  posture  toward  social  responsibility  activities ,  economic  per -  formance ,  and  control  variables .  All  bivariate  correlations  between  SOCDIS  and  the  independent  variables  possess  the  expected  sign .  The  strategic  posture  variables  PUBAFF  and  FOUND ,  the  economic  performance  variables  MGRROE  and  BETA ,  and  the  control  variable  AGE  are  all  significantly  correlated   (p  value   <  0 .10 )  with  the  dependent  variable .  Correlations  between  independent  variables  provide  no  indication  that  an  unacceptable  level  of  multicollinearity  is  present  in  the  data .  Farrar   &  Glauber   (1967 )  concluded  that  harm -  ful  levels  of  multicollinearity  were  not  present  until  bivariate  correlations  reached  0 .8  or  0 .9 .  In  this  study  no  correlations  between  indepen -  dent  variables  reach  this  level ,  however ,  the  correlation  between  company  size   (SIZE )  and  the  number  of  public  affairs  personnel   (PUBAFF )  is  0 .727 .  To  further  test  for  potential  multi -  collinearity  problems  an  OLS  regression  was  used  to  generate  variance  inflation  factors  for  the  independent  variables  in  the  social  dis -  closure  model .  Marquardt   (1970 )  concluded  that  multicollinearity  is  a  potential  problem  if  a   6O8  R  W .  ROBERTS  TABLE  4  Logtsttc  regression  results  for  the  soctal  responmbfllty  dtsclosure  model  Dependent  variable   =  ratmg  of  corporate  social  responsibility  disclosures  for  1984 -1986  Independent  Variable  Expected  Parameter  Standard  Cht -square  variable  name  sign  estimate  error  stat ~stm  Percentage  of  ownershtp  held  by  PSH   - -   - -0  013  O  015  0  74  management  and  pnnctpal  shareholders  for  1984  Cojntrlbutmns  to  corporate  PAC   +  0  058  0  033  3 .02 * *  political  actton  committee  for  1981 -1984  Average  debt /equity  ratio  for  DERATIO   +  0 .166  0  105  2  51 "  1981 -1984  Corporate  pubhc  affatrs  staff  PUBAFF   +  0 .048  0  038  1  63     members  m  1984  Corporate  sponsor  of  a  FOUND   +  1  255  0  545  5  30 * * *  philanthropic  foundation  Average  growth  m  return  on  MGRROE   +  0  007  0  004  3  41   *   *  equity  for  1981 -1984  Market  model  measure  of  BETA   -   - -1  118  0  872  1  64 *  systematic  rtsk   (beta )  for  1984  Age  of  corporation  since  AGE   +  0  030  0  O11  7  63 * * *  inceptton  as  of  1984  High  profile  mdustry  status  INDEFF   +  1  033  0  548  3  55 * *  Average  revenues  1981 -1984  SIZE   + / -   -0  413  0  330  1  56  bo  n .a  0  931  2  613  0  13  bl  n .a   -0  132  2  611  0  O0  Model  chvsquare   =  34 .29  with  10  d  f . ,  stgnificant  at  less  than  the  0 .001  level ;  R   =  0  296  One -tailed  tests   (except  for  intercept  terms ) :   * * *  significant  at  0  O1  level ;   * *  stgntficant  at  0 .05  level ,   *stgntficant  at  0  10  level  variance  inflation  factor  exceeds  10 .0 .  In  this  analysis ,  the  variance  inflation  factors  for  the  SIZE  and  PUBAFF  variables  were  2 .33  and  2 .36 ,  respectively .  The  OLS  findings  mitigate ,  to  some  extent ,  multicollinearity  concerns .  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  RESULTS  Estimation  of  the  social  disclosure  model  The  empirical  model  was  estimated  using  logistic  regression  and  is  significant  at  the  0 .001  level  with  a  Chi -square  score  statistic  of  34 .29 .  The  coefficient  of  correlation  for  the  logistic  regression   (R )  is  0 .296  and  is  interpreted  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  in  OLS  regression .  The  estimation  of  the  model  is  presented  in  Table  4 .  As  can  be  seen  by  analyzing  Table  4 ,  all  three  stakeholder  power  variables   (PSH ,  PAC ,  and  DERATIO )  possess  the  expected  signs .  PAC  is  significant  at  the  0 .05  level  and  DERATIO  at  the  0 .10  level .  The  strategic  posture  variables   (PUBAFF  and  FOUND )  have  the  expected  positive  relationships  to  levels  of  corporate  social  disclosure ,  with  PUBAFF  significant  at  the  0 .10  level  and  FOUND  significant  at  the  0 .01  level .  MGRROE  and  BETA ,  the  economic  per -  formance  variables ,  are  significantly  related  to  SOCDIS  at  the  0 .05  and  O .  10  level ,  respectively .  Of  the  model 's  three  control  variables ,  AGE  and  IND  have  the  expected  positive  relationship  to  SOCDIS  and  are  significant  at  the  0 .01  and  0 .05  level .  MSALES  possesses  a  negative  sign  and  is  not  significant .   SOCIAL  RESPONSIBILITY  DISCLOSURE  609  Discussion  of  research  findings  The  results  of  the  empirical  tests  are  of  interest  for  several  reasons .  First ,  the  significance  of  the  model  provides  evidence  that  stake -  holder  theory  is  an  appropriate  foundation  for  empirical  analyses  of  corporate  social  dis -  closure  and  that  factors  other  than  economic  performance  are  important  in  social  respon -  sibility  disclosure  research .  Second ,  the  results  support  the  argument  that  current  period  levels  of  social  responsibility  disclosure  relate  to  prior  period  measures  of  economic  performance ,  stakeholder  power ,  and  strategic  posture  to -  ward  social  responsibility  activities .  Also ,  the  significance  of  individual  variables  supports  arguments  regarding  relationships  between  social  disclosures  and  specific  empirical  measures  of  Ullmann 's  constructs .  Given  that  prior  research  views  corporate  political  action  committee  contributions  as  a  major  part  of  corporate  political  strategy   (Keim   &  Zeithaml ,  1986 ;  Keim   &  Baysinger ,  1988 ) ,  the  significance  of  PAC  suggests  that  corpora -  tions  confronted  with  a  high  level  of  political  exposure  are  more  likely  to  disclose  social  responsibility  activities .  It  suggests  that  social  responsibility  disclosures  and  political  action  committee  contributions  may  be  aspects  of  an  overall  corporate  strategy  for  managing  govern -  ment  stakeholders .  The  significance  of  DERATIO  complements  the  empirical  findings  of  Barton  et  aL   (1989 )  regarding  stakeholder  considera -  tions  in  planning  corporate  financial  policy .  In  addition ,  it  supports  the  contention  that  social  responsibility  disclosures  may  be  viewed  by  management  as  a  way  to  meet  certain  creditor  stakeholder  expectations .  The  lack  of  significance  for  the  stockholder  power  variable  PSH  does  not  support  the  proposition  that  widespread  stock  ownership  increases  corporate  incentives  to  make  social  responsibility  disclosures .  The  finding  that  dispersion  of  stock  ownership  is  not  significantly  related  to  the  level  of  social  disclosure  may  be  explained  by  limitations  of  the  PSH  measure .  Other  measures  of  dispersion  of  stock  ownership  could  produce  a  different  outcome .  The  significance  of  the  strategic  posture  variables  representing  corporate  sponsorship  of  a  philanthropic  foundation   (FOUND )  and  the  size  of  the  corporation 's  public  affairs  depart -  ment   (PUBAFF )  implies  that  an  active  posture  toward  social  responsibility  leads  to  greater  levels  of  social  disclosure .  This  finding  supports  arguments  forwarded  in  the  fifth  section  that  were  based  on  Rosebush   (1987 )  and  Navarro   (1988 ) .  The  results  also  indicate  that  corporations  exhibiting  relatively  strong  economic  per -  formance  in  prior  periods ,  as  measured  by  growth  in  return  on  equity   (MGRROE ) ,  are  more  likely  to  have  high  current  levels  of  social  disclosure .  This  is  consistent  with  Ullmann 's  notion  that  acceptable  levels  of  economic  performance  are  necessary  before  company  resources  will  be  devoted  to  meeting  social  demands .  The  significant ,  negative  relationship  found  between  the  level  of  corporate  social  disclosure  and  systematic  risk   (BETA )  provides  evidence  that  companies  with  less  stable  pat -  terns  of  stock  market  returns  are  relatively  less  likely  to  commit  resources  to  social  activities .  The  results  of  this  study  concerning  the  relationship  between  economic  performance ,  systematic  risk ,  and  social  responsibility  dis -  closure  also  support  the  empirical  findings  of  McGuire  et  aL   (1988 ) .  Suggestions  that  corporate  age  and  industry  classification  may  act  as  intervening  variables  in  empirical  tests  regarding  social  responsibility  activities  are  supported  by  the  results  pre -  sented  in  this  study   (Ullmann ,  1985 ;  Cochran   &  Wood ,  1984 ) .  These  findings  may  be  explained  in  part  by  the  arguments  that  age  and  industry  status  are  macro -level  proxies  for  aspects  of  stakeholder  power ,  strategic  posture  toward  social  responsibility ,  or  economic  performance .  Additional  work  is  needed  to  improve  our  understanding  of  the  empirical  associations  between  corporate  age  and  industry  classifica -  tion  and  levels  of  social  disclosure .  CONCLUSIONS  AND  LIMITATIONS  The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  empirically  test  a  stakeholder  theory  analysis  of  the  deter -   610  1L  W  ROBERTS  minants  of  corporate  social  responsibility  dis -  closure .  The  empirical  results  support  a  stakeholder  theory  approach  to  analyzing  corporate  social  decisions  and  are  consistent  with  the  frame -  work  developed  by  Ullmann   (1985 ) .  The  results  of  this  study  provide  strong  evidence  that  applications  of  stakeholder  theory  to  empirical  corporate  social  respon -  sibility  research  can  move  future  research  in  this  area  beyond  ad  hoc  analyses  relating  corporate  social  responsibility  actions  to  selected  corporate  characteristics .  Stakeholder  theory  forms  a  theoretical  foundation  in  which  to  analyze  the  impact  of  prior  economic  per -  formance ,  strategic  posture  toward  social  re -  spousibility  activities ,  and  the  intensity  of  stakeholder  power  on  levels  of  corporate  social  disclosure .  The  empirical  results  may  enhance  the  descriptive  power  of  future  models  de -  signed  to  predict  or  explain  corporate  social  responsibility  actions  by  providing  insights  into  social ,  political ,  and  economic  external  pres -  sures  that  probably  influence  corporate  social  responsibility  decisions .  Several  new  directions  for  future  research  are  suggested  by  the  findings  of  this  study .  First ,  the  influence  of  other  types  of  stakeholders  on  levels  of  corporate  social  disclosure  could  be  tested .  In  addition  to  shareholders ,  creditors ,  and  legislative  bodies ,  Freeman   (1984 )  in -  cluded  customers ,  suppliers ,  and  special  in -  terest  groups  as  corporate  stakeholders .  This  study  could  also  be  replicated  using  direct  measures  of  corporate  social  performance  as  the  dependent  variable .  Finally ,  the  stakeholder  model  could  be  adapted  to  investigate  specific  types  of  social  disclosure  along  the  lines  suggested  by  Cowen  et  al .   (1987 ) .  The  findings  of  this  study  are  subject  to  several  limitations .  While  extensive  efforts  were  made  to  develop  accurate  proxies  for  the  stakeholder  power ,  strategic  posture ,  and  economic  performance  dimensions  of  the  social  disclosure  model ,  data  constraints  may  limit  the  construct  validity  of  the  selected  variables .  Likewise ,  the  empirical  tests  were  performed  on  large ,  U .S . -based  corporations  and  may  limit  the  generalizability  of  the  findings .  Finally ,  given  the  exceedingly  com -  plex  nature  of  the  business  environment ,  there  are  inherent  limits  in  the  ability  of  positive  empirical  research  to  capture  all  of  the  dimen -  sions  that  influence  corporate  social  respon -  sibility  decision  making .  BIBLIOGRAPHY  Abbott ,  W   &  Monsen ,  R ,  On  the  Measurement  of  Corporate  Social  Responsabtlity  self -reported  Disclosure  as  a  Measure  of  Corporate  Soctal  Involvement ,  Academy  of  Management  Journal   (1979 )  pp  501 -515  Alexander ,  G   &  Buchholz ,  IL ,  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  and  Stock  Market  Performance ,  Academy  of  Management  Journal   (1978 )  pp .  479 -486 .  Anderson ,  J   &  Frankle ,  A . ,  Voluntary  Soctal  Reporting .  an  Iso -Beta  Portfoho  Analysts ,  Accounting  Rewew   (July  1980 )  pp  468 -479  Ansoff ,  I ,  Corporate  Strategy   (New  York .  McGraw -Hill ,  1965 ) .  Barton ,  S . ,  Hill ,  N ,   &  Sundaram ,  S ,  An  Empirtcal  Test  of  Stakeholder  Predtctaons  of  Capital  Structure ,  Financial  Management   (Sprang  1989 )  pp  36 - -44  Belkaom ,  A ,  The  Impact  of  the  Dtsclosure  of  the  Environmental  Effects  of  Orgamzatton  Behavior  on  the  Market ,  Financial  Management   (1976 )  pp  26 -31  Blatr ,  C . ,  Scanmng  the  Corporate  Hotazon  Pubhc  Affairs  m  the  Strategically  Managed  Organizatton ,  Canadian  Business  Review   (Autumn  1986 )  pp  33 -36  Bowman ,  E   &  Haire ,  M ,  A  Strategic  Posture  Toward  Corporate  Soctal  Responsibility ,  California  Management  Review   (1975 )  pp  49 -58  Chakravarthy ,  B . ,  Measuring  Strategic  Performance ,  Strategic  Management  Journal   (1986 )  pp  437 - - -458  Chen ,  K .   &  Metcalf ,  R ,  The  Relationship  Between  Pollution  Control  Record  and  Fmanctal  Indicators  Revisited ,  Accounting  Review   (January  1980 )  pp .  168 -177   SOCIAL  RESPONSIBILITY  DISCLOSURE  611  Chug ,  h ,  L ,  Haneman ,  M   &  Mahapatra ,  S . ,  Impact  of  Pollution  Control  Regulations  on  the  Market  Risk  of  Securities  m  the  U .S . ,Journal  of  Economic  Studies   (May  1978 )  p  67  Close ,  A .   &  Colgate ,  C ,  Jr   (eds ) ,  National  Directory  of  Corporate  Public  Affairs   (Washington ,  DC  Columbia  Books ,  1983 )  Close ,  A .   &  Colgate ,  C ,  Jr   (eds ) ,  National  Directory  of  Corporate  Public  Affairs   (Washington ,  DC  Columbia  Books ,  1984 )  Cochran ,  P   &  Wood ,  R . ,  Corporate  Social  Responstbdity  and  Financial  Performance ,  Academy  of  Management  Journal   (1984 )  pp .  42 -56  Copeland ,  T .   &  Weston ,  J . ,Financial  Theory  and  Corporate  Policy   (Reading ,  MA :  Addison -Wesley ,  1983   ) .  Cornell ,  B .   &  Shapiro ,  A ,  Corporate  Stakeholders  and  Corporate  Finance ,  FinanctalManagement   (1987 )  pp .  5 -14  Councd  on  Economtc  Priorities   (Lydenberg ~  S . ,  Martin ,  A   &  Strub ,  S . ) ,  Rating  America 's  Corporate  Conscience   (Reading ,  MA  Addison -Wesley ,  1986 )  Cowen ,  S . ,  Ferreri ,  L .   &  Parker ,  L . ,  The  Impact  of  Corporate  Characteristics  on  Social  Responsibility  Disclosure  a  Typology  and  Frequency -Based  Analysts ,  Accounting  Organizations  and  Society   (1987 )  pp .  111 -122 .  Davis ,  K . ,  The  Case  For  and  Against  Business  Assumptions  of  Social  Responsibilities ,  Academy  of  Management  Journal   (1973 )  pp  312 -322 .  Dierkes ,  M .   &  Antal ,  A . ,  The  Usefulness  and  Use  of  Social  Reporting  Information ,  Accounting  Organizations  and  Society   (1985 )  pp  29 -34 .  Dierkes ,  M .   &  Antal ,  A ,  Whither  Corporate  Social  Reporting :  Is  It  Time  to  Legislate ~ ,  California  Management  Review   (1986 )  pp  106 -120 .  Farrar ,  D . ,   &  Glauber ,  R . ,  Multicollmearity  in  Regression  Analysts  the  Problem  Revistted ,  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics   (February  1967 )  pp .  92 -107 .  Frankle ,  A .   &  Anderson ,  J ,  The  Impact  of  the  Dtsclosure  of  Environmental  Effects  of  Orgamzational  Behavtor  on  the  Market -  Comment ,  Financial  Management   (Summer  1978 )  pp  76 -78  Freeman ,  IL ,  Strategic  Management  a  Stakeholder  Approach ,  Advances  m  Strategic  Management   (1983 )  pp  31 - - -60 .  Freeman ,  IL ,  Strategic  Management . .  a  Stakeholder  Approach   (Marshall ,  MA  Pitman ,  1984 )  Hahn ,  IL ,  The  Pohtical  Economy  of  Environmental  Relations ,  Public  Choice   (April  1990 )  pp  21 -47  Hatten ,  K . ,  Schendel ,  D .   &  Cooper ,  A . ,  A  Strategtc  Model  of  the  Brewing  Industry .  1952 -1971 ,  Academy  of  Management  Journal   (1978 )  pp  592 -610 .  Ingrain ,  1L ,  An  Investigation  of  the  Information  Content  of   (Certain )  Social  Responsibility  Disclosures ,  Journal  of  Accounting  Research   (1978 )  pp .  270 -285  Keim ,  G ,  Managerial  Behavior  and  the  Social  Responsibilities  Debate :  Goals  Versus  Constraints ,  Academy  of  Management  Journal   (1978a )  pp .  57 -68 .  Keim ,  G ,  Corporate  Soctal  Responsibihty  an  Assessment  of  the  Enhghtened  Self -Interest  Model ,  Academy  of  Management  Review   (January  1978b )  pp  32 -39  Ke ~m ,  G   &  Baysmger ,  B ,  The  Efficacy  of  Busmess  Pohtical  Activity -  Competitive  Considerations  m  a  Principal -Agent  Context ,  Journal  of  Management   (June  1988 )  pp .  163 -180  Ketm ,  G .   &  Zardkoohi ,  A ,  Looking  for  Leverage  m  PAC  Markets .  Corporate  and  Labor  Contributions  Considered ,  Public  Choice   (July  1988 )  pp  21 -34  Keim ,  G   &  Zeithaml ,  C . ,  Corporate  Pohtical  Strategy  and  Legtslative  Decision  Making :  a  Review  and  Contingency  Approach ,  Academy  of  Management  Review   (October  1986 )  pp .  828 -843 .  Mahapatra ,  S . ,  Investor  Reaction  to  Corporation  Social  Accounting ,  Journal  of  Business  Finance  and  Accounting   (Sprmg  1984 )  pp  29 -40  Marcus ,  A   &  Kaufman ,  A . ,  The  Continued  Expanston  of  the  Corporate  Pubhc  Affatrs  Function ,  Business  Horizons   (March  1988 )  pp  58 -62  Marquardt ,  D . ,  Generalized  Inverses ,  Ridge  Regresston ,  Bmsed  Ianear  Estimation  and  Nonlinear  Esttmation ,  Technometrlcs   (August  1970 )  pp  591 -612  Marx ,  T ,  Strategic  Planning  for  Pubhc  Affairs ,  Long  Range  Planning   (February  1990 )  pp  9 -16 .  McGuire ,  J ,  Sundgren ,  A   &  Sehneewels ,  T . ,  Corporate  Social  Reponstbdity  and  Firm  Financial  Performance ,  Academy  of  Management  Journal   (December  1988 )  pp  854 -872 .  Mills ,  D .   &  Gardner ,  M . ,  Financial  Profiles  and  the  Disclosure  of  Expenditures  for  Soctally  Responstble  Purposes ,Journal  of  Business  Research   (December  1984 )  pp .  407 -424  Moskowitz ,  M ,  Choosing  Socially  Responsible  Stocks ,  Business  and  Society   (1972 )  pp  71 -75 .  Navarro ,  P . ,  Why  Do  Corporations  Gtve  to  Charity ? ,Journal  of  Business   (1988 )  pp .  65 -93   612  R .W .  ROBERTS  Rosebush ,  J . ,  Corporate  Contribution  and  the  Bottom  Line ,  Business  and  Economic  Review   (Fall  1987 )  pp  26 -28  Shane ,  P .   &  Sptcer ,  B . ,  Market  Response  to  Environmental  Information  Produced  Outside  the  Firm ,  Accounting  Review   (July  1983 )  pp  521 -538  Sptcer ,  B ,  Investors ,  Corporate  Social  Performance  and  Information  Disclosure  an  Empirical  Study ,  Accounting  Review   (January  1978a )  pp  94 -111  Spicer ,  B ,  Market  Risk ,  Accounting  Data  and  Compames  Pollution  Control  Records ,  Journal  of  Busines , ~  Finance  and  Accounting   (1978b )  pp  67 -83  Spicer ,  B . ,  The  Relationship  Between  Pollution  Control  Record  and  Financial  Indicators  Revisited :  Further  Comment ,  Accounting  Review   (January  1980 )  pp  178 -185  Sterner ,  G . ,  Social  Pohcles  for  Business ,  Califorma  Management  Rev :ew   (1972 )  pp  17 -24  Sturdtvant ,  F . ,  Executive  and  Activists  Test  of  Stakeholder  Management ,  California  Management  Review   (Fall  1979 )  pp  53 -59  Trotman ,  K .   &  Bradley ,  G . ,  Assoclataon  Between  Social  Responsibility  Disclosure  and  Characteristics  of  Companies ,  Accountmg ~  Orgamzations  and  Society   (  1981   )  pp  355 -362  Ullmann ,  A ,  Data  in  Search  of  a  Theory  a  Critical  Examination  of  the  Relattonstup  Among  Social  Performance ,  Social  Disclosure ,  and  Economic  Performance ,  Academy  of  Management  Review   (  1985   )  pp  540 -577  Watts ,  IL   &  Zlmmerman ,  J ,  Towards  a  Posiuve  Theory  of  the  Determination  of  Accountmg  Standards ,  Accounting  Review   (January  1978 )  pp  112 -134 .  Wiseman ,  J ,  An  Evaluation  of  Environmental  Disclosures  Made  m  Corporate  Annual  Reports ,  Accountin ~  Organizations  and  Society   (1982 )  pp  53 -63   
